 Sustainable Energy Academy – Module 2 UNDP Sustainable Energy Hub April 26,
2024 Module 2: Energy Access and Inclusive Energy Services Module overview
Access to energy and inclusive energy services are essential drivers of social
progress and economic growth and are intertwined with human rights. Even so,
large swaths of the world still lack access to energy. In many places, even
where there is energy, it may not be equitably distributed – individuals and
entire neighborhoods on lower income scales may not be able to afford it and the
services may be intermittent or poorly installed, presenting health hazards. The
transition to sustainable energy provides an opportunity to correct energy
access imbalances throughout the world. This module emphasizes the importance of
providing energy services that are inclusive, affordable, reliable, and safe for
all. It illuminates the benefits of energy access on health, education, gender
equality, and wealth creation. It describes known challenges in addressing
energy access gaps and interlinkages with the Sustainable Development Goals and
highlights working solutions based on real-world examples. By scrutinizing the
social and economic implications of energy access and emphasizing the role of
partnerships and stakeholders, participants will be equipped with the knowledge
to effectuate positive change, ensuring that no one is left in the dark.
Learning Objectives After participating in this module, you will be able to: 1)
Describe the importance of energy access and inclusive energy services for
social well-being, economic prosperity, and human rights. 2) Assess the
multidimensional impacts of energy access, including its effects on health,
education, gender equality, and poverty reduction. 3)    Identify energy access
challenges within diverse contexts, including financial constraints, risk
factors, governance issues, infrastructure limitations, and technological
barriers 4)  Develop comprehensive strategies to address energy access
challenges, with a focus on regions facing persistent gaps, particularly in the
global south, while proposing inclusive and sustainable solutions 5)  Foster
collaborative, multi-stakeholder partnerships aiming to solve energy access
problems while understanding the different roles and contributions of each type
of partner organization. Table of Contents Module 2: Energy Access and Inclusive
Energy Services     1 Module overview       1 Learning Objectives   1 1.
Introduction to Energy Access      5 1.1.  Fundamental Energy Needs        5
1.2.  Tenets of Energy Access 6 1.3.  Energy Poverty and Fuel Poverty 8 2.
The Global Energy Access Gap    9 2.1.  Access to Electricity   9 2.2.  Access
to Clean Cooking Fuel and Technologies   10 2.3. Access to Heating and Cooling
Fuels and Technologies    11 2.4. Urban-Rural Divide      14 3.   Understanding
Challenges in Energy Access       17 3.1. Limited Infrastructure  17 3.2.
Financial Barriers      17 3.3. Data and Information Gaps       19 3.4. Energy
Poverty and Reproduction of Inequalities 22 4.   Unlocking Opportunities Through
Sustainable Energy Access       23 4.1. Poverty Reduction and Economic
Development      23 4.2. Improving Health Outcomes       24 4.3. Empowering
Education    25 4.4. Advancing Gender Equality       26 4.5. Fostering Community
Development 27 5.   Bridging the Energy Access Gap  28 5.1. Intersectional
Approach 29 5.2. Technological Solutions 30 5.3. Financing Mechanisms    32 5.4.
Policy Frameworks       36 5.5. Collaborative Partnerships      39 Case Study 1:
RBAS: Solar for Health – Yemen 25 Case Study 2: RBPAP: Climate Saathis. Women
act to make slums climate-resilient.     26 Case Study 3: RBEC: UNDP Energy
Efficiency Project in Kazakhstan     31 Case Study 4: RBA: Africa Minigrids
Program (AMP) – Eswatini 32 Case Study 5: RBLAC: Energy Safety Nets in Brazil.
Luz para Todos (Light for All), Tarifa Social (Social Tariff) and Bolsa Familia
(Family Allowance)        38 Case Study 6: SIDS: Wintua-Lorlow Electrical
Cooperative – Vanuatu   45 1. Introduction to Energy Access Situated at the
heart of the 7th Sustainable Development Goal (SDG), energy access plays a
pivotal role in fostering global prosperity. Energy access refers to the
availability of energy services, such as electricity or clean cooking fuels, to
meet the basic needs of a population. On the other hand, inclusive energy
services refer to the equitable distribution of energy services among different
groups within a population, ensuring that no one is left behind. This includes
addressing the needs of vulnerable populations, such as women, children, and
youth, indigenous people, and urban and rural communities. Before delving into
the specifics of energy access, let’s explore key concepts such as fundamental
energy needs, energy poverty, fuel poverty, and the principles underpinning
energy access, as they lay the groundwork for a comprehensive understanding of
this topic within the context of this training module. 1)        Fundamental
Energy Needs Fundamental energy needs represent the core requirements for energy
services that individuals and communities rely upon to ensure their well-being,
comfort, and productivity. These needs encompass a range of essential
components, including electricity, cooking, heating, and cooling. The relevance
and fulfillment of each one of these needs is intricately tied to the
geographical, socio-cultural, and economic context in which people live,
emphasizing the importance of considering the unique characteristics of each
community when addressing energy access. Electricity: Electricity stands out as
a fundamental energy need due to its unparalleled versatility, reliability, and
indispensability in modern life. Unlike other forms of energy, electricity
serves as a versatile carrier that can power an extensive range of appliances
and technologies, contributing to various aspects of daily living. The
significance of electricity becomes particularly evident through its role in
powering lighting systems, electronic devices, communication tools, and other
applications crucial for education, healthcare, and economic activities.
Moreover, in many societies, electricity enables the functioning of essential
infrastructure, from hospitals and schools to industries and businesses,
enhancing overall societal well-being and productivity. Cooking: Having access
to clean fuels, such as biogas, liquified petroleum gas (LPG) or electricity and
efficient cooking appliances is a fundamental need with far-reaching
implications for health, environment, and socio-economic development. In many
parts of the world, especially in regions confronting multidimensional poverty,
traditional cooking methods using solid fuels such as wood, coal, or biomass are
common, contributing to indoor air pollution. Clean cooking fuels coupled with
more efficient appliances like induction stoves or clean cookstoves offer a
transformative solution to this challenge. Heating and Cooling: In many regions,
especially those experiencing extreme temperatures, the need for heating or
cooling is essential for maintaining comfortable living conditions. Access to
clean fuels and efficient appliances for heating and/or cooling is a fundamental
need with significant implications for both individual well-being and broader
environmental sustainability. Traditional heating methods often involve the use
of fossil fuels or wood, contributing to air pollution, deforestation and
climate change. Clean fuels, such as electricity or sustainably sourced biomass,
coupled with energy-efficient heating appliances, offer a pathway to reduce the
environmental impact of these energy needs. Moreover, transitioning to cleaner
options improves indoor air quality and public health, particularly in areas
where reliance on solid fuels is common. Communal Energy Needs: Communal energy
needs encompass the essential services that keep a community functioning. This
includes public lighting for safety and security after dark. It also involves
ensuring sufficient and reliable energy access for communal institutions like
schools, hospitals, and community centers. Furthermore, a well-lit and energy-
powered public transportation system is crucial for mobility and economic
activity. 2)       Tenets of Energy Access There are consider five fundamental
aspects that surround energy: availability, adequacy, reliability,
affordability, and safety. These elements often overlap but are distinct.
Together, they form the foundation upon which energy access stands, beyond the
mere presence of an energy source to satisfy one or multiple energy needs. --
Availability: Availability encompasses the tangible existence and accessibility
of energy sources and services within a specific region or community. It
signifies the physical presence of essential energy infrastructure, ranging from
electricity grids (transmission and distribution) and fuel distribution systems,
all designed to ensure that energy is available when required. --    Adequacy:
Adequacy refers to the capacity of available energy services to address the
multifaceted and ever-evolving needs of individuals and communities. This
comprehensive evaluation demands careful consideration of various contextual
variables, including geographical and socio-cultural factors, which
significantly influence how a community defines its energy requirements and
selects the specific suite of energy services that best satisfy those needs. --
Reliability: Reliability refers to the uninterrupted and predictable delivery of
energy services. It means that individuals, industries and communities can
access energy when they need it, with their consumption characterized by minimal
disruptions or downtime. Reliable energy services grant people, businesses and
institutions the confidence and peace of mind that a continuous and
uninterrupted energy supply will underpin their diverse needs in daily life.
Indeed, reliable energy supply is not merely a convenience but a critical
necessity, supporting economic and daily activities, and facilitating social
development. --     Affordability: Affordability is a crucial facet of energy
access, as it is a necessary condition for equitable distribution in a given
population. The concept refers to whether energy services are financially within
reach for individuals and communities, with particular attention to those in
lower income brackets. This dimension considers not only the upfront costs of
obtaining energy sources but also the ongoing expenses associated with their
utilization, ensuring that the pursuit of essential energy does not impose an
unsustainable strain on households. A truly affordable energy system fosters
economic stability, reduces disparities, and empowers vulnerable populations to
partake in the benefits of modern energy. -- Safety: The quality and
environmental impact of the energy services provided is essential. Energy
sources and technologies should not compromise human health or harm the
environment. Safe energy access encompasses the promotion of clean and
environmentally friendly energy options, effectively mitigating potential health
risks. Ensuring safety considerations extend beyond the energy installation and
infrastructure; it also encompasses the final conditions of use and even the
quality of housing. For instance, using biomass for heating or cooking may
present heightened hazards when utilized indoors in a wood or straw house.
Similarly, an electric shower in a household with precarious electrical
installations could easily overload the system, potentially leading to
accidents. Recognizing the cross-cutting nature of safety is essential for a
comprehensive understanding of energy access and for developing strategies that
prioritize the well-being of people and the environment. These five aspects
guide our understanding of the multifaceted nature of energy access, as well as
the path toward comprehensive, inclusive energy services. With these
considerations in mind, let’s discuss the notion of fundamental energy needs. 3)
Energy Poverty and Fuel Poverty Energy Poverty There are multiple perspectives
and definitions of Energy Poverty. According to Reddy (2000), it is
characterized as “the absence of sufficient choice in accessing adequate,
affordable, reliable, high-quality, safe and environmentally benign energy
services to support economic and human development”. This notion is supported by
the seminal work of Amartya Sen (1999), who argued that development is not only
about reaching a certain income level but critically hinges on having the
“capabilities” that enable us to make choices that are most meaningful to
individuals and communities around the world, regardless of what they decide
their priorities are. Energy poverty is closely intertwined with various forms
of inequality, magnifying its consequences. These encompass economic
disparities, which not only sustain circumstances of poverty and limit access to
essential resources but also intertwine with gender inequalities. The latter, in
particular, creates a challenging environment for girls and women worldwide, as
energy poverty exacerbates responsibilities in shouldering unpaid domestic work,
as well as enduring daily hardships stemming from inadequate household energy
access. On average, women spend up to 18 hours a week collecting wood and other
fuels – time that could otherwise be spent for education or earning income. This
intersection of energy poverty with multiple dimensions of inequality paints a
complex picture that necessitates comprehensive solutions to address the diverse
challenges it presents. Fuel Poverty The concept of fuel poverty hones in on the
critical aspect of affordability concerning access to essential energy services.
According to one influential definition, fuel poverty occurs when individuals or
households face challenges in meeting the costs of heating, cooling, cooking,
and powering their homes, leading to adverse consequences for their well-being
and quality of life. The concept of fuel poverty is an entry point to better
grasp the multifaceted challenges associated with energy access. By emphasizing
the affordability dimension, it provides a nuanced lens through which
policymakers, researchers, and advocates can unpack the socioeconomic barriers
that hinder individuals from accessing clean and reliable energy. Developing a
better understanding of fuel poverty allows for targeted interventions and
policies that could address the root causes of energy inequity, ensuring that
the benefits of energy access are shared equitably across different socio-
economic strata. 1) The Global Energy Access Gap In the midst of ongoing
advancements in global energy infrastructure and technology, a sobering reality
persists: millions of individuals worldwide still lack access to reliable and
modern energy services. The Global Energy Access Gap underscores not only a
scarcity of available energy services but also significant disparities in the
quality of access experienced across diverse populations around the world. 1)
Access to Electricity According to the SDG7 Progress Report 2023, a staggering
675 million individuals still lack access to electricity, with a significant
portion residing in sub-Saharan Africa (see Figure 1). While progress has been
made in recent decades, with global electricity access rising from 84% in 2010
to 91% in 2021, substantial barriers remain. Figure 1: Share of population with
access to electricity in 2021 (World Bank, 2023) 2)   Access to Clean Cooking
Fuel and Technologies Clean cooking entails the use of sustainable fuels and
modern technologies that do not jeopardize health or the environment. According
to the SDG7 Progress Report 2023, 2.3 billion people lacked access to clean
cooking in 2021. Deficiencies in accessing clean cooking directly impact one in
three people globally. This has far-reaching health, social, and environmental
consequences for both households and communities. These individuals are exposed
daily to harmful fumes while cooking, leading to household air pollution, which
is responsible for an estimated 3.2 million deaths annually in 2020, nearly half
of all air pollution-related fatalities. In developed countries, virtually all
households enjoy clean cooking options. Notably, the burden of this issue is
acutely felt in the world's poorest communities, with 80% of the population in
sub-Saharan Africa lacking access to clean cooking (see Figure 2). Additionally,
remote but sizeable communities in middle-income countries, such as India and
Indonesia, also grapple with this challenge. Women bear a disproportionate share
of household responsibilities in these communities, enduring social costs linked
to time poverty resulting from cooking and fuel collection duties, and health
costs from high exposure to indoor pollution. Approximately 60% of premature
deaths due to household air pollution affect women and children, including
237,000 child deaths under the age of 5 in 2020. In households that cook with
solid fuels, women can often spend up to 18 hours weekly collecting fuel for
cooking, while children may have to skip school to assist. This might exacerbate
the risk of violence during fuel-gathering in less secure environments. Despite
notable progress in electricity access, the advancement in clean cooking access
has been relatively slow. Achieving universal access to clean cooking by 2030
would require an annual investment of around USD 8 billion between today and
2030, coupled with initiatives to promote the adoption of clean fuels and
stoves. Figure 2: Share of population with access to clean cooking fuels and
technologies in 2021 (WHO 2023; Stoner and others 2021) 3)     Access to Heating
and Cooling Fuels and Technologies The global disparity in access to heating and
cooling fuels and technologies poses a significant challenge in understanding
and addressing the diverse energy needs of populations around the world. Unlike
other energy access indicators, tracking the availability and affordability of
heating and cooling solutions is particularly complex due to the wide array of
technologies and fuels involved, coupled with the varied climatization
requirements across different regions. The diverse climatic conditions across
regions add another layer of complexity to tracking access to heating and
cooling. While some areas require robust heating solutions for colder seasons,
others face challenges related to excessive heat, necessitating effective
cooling technologies. Heating and cooling solutions span a spectrum of
technologies, ranging from traditional methods like open fires and stoves to
modern appliances. Additionally, the use of different fuels further complicates
the landscape, with different regions and countries relying, among other
options, on biomass, fossil fuels, electricity or renewables based on local
availability and economic factors. The multifaceted nature of these technologies
and fuels makes it challenging to develop a uniform metric for assessing global
access. In some contexts, the uncertain quality and reliability of information
clutters the policy-making process. One indirect approach to monitor and address
the global access gap in heating and cooling is by focusing on the quality of
housing. Adequate housing, a key objective of SDG 11, involves ensuring access
for all to safe, affordable, and sustainable housing. By promoting adequate
housing, which includes considerations for thermal efficiency, policymakers
contribute to improving access to heating and cooling. Well-insulated homes with
energy-efficient designs can help mitigate the demand for excessive heating or
cooling, addressing both energy efficiency and the well-being of occupants.
Monitoring progress in achieving SDG Indicator 11.1 (proportion of urban
population living in slums, informal settlements or inadequate housing) provides
a lens through which to indirectly assess housing efficiency and, in turn,
access to heating and cooling. By striving to meet the targets of SDG Target
11.1, which aims to ensure access to adequate, safe, and affordable housing for
all, the global community can contribute to narrowing the access gap in heating
and cooling technologies. Box 1: Chilling Prospects Initiative The Sustainable
Energy for All (SEforALL) "Chilling Prospects" initiative offers a comprehensive
assessment of cooling access risks across 77 countries with a focus on
vulnerable populations. The analysis considers various factors of vulnerability,
tracking progress annually with the best available data. It strategically
categorizes populations into high, medium, and low-risk groups based on their
access to cooling for thermal comfort, food and agricultural produce, and
medical products. Notably, the initiative also introduces a gender-specific
analysis, acknowledging the differentiated impacts on women. Within the 77
countries assessed, 1.12 billion people are considered at high risk due to a
lack of access to cooling. This includes 306.1 million rural poor lacking
electricity access, and 815.0 million urban poor facing challenges with housing
quality and intermittent electricity supply. Within the 1.12 billion people
considered to be at high risk across 77 countries, gender-disaggregated data
reveals that women constitute approximately 53% of this population, possibly
indicating a higher vulnerability among women compared to men due to
intersecting disparities. >A close-up of a number Description automatically
generated< The recent reduction in the number of people at high risk within the
assessment countries, from 1.14 billion to 1.12 billion, signals progress.
India, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Yemen (prior to the recent civil war) have
witnessed substantial reductions in their rural poor populations at high risk,
driven by efforts to expand electricity access and reduce poverty. However, the
number of urban poor at high risk increased slightly, emphasizing the ongoing
challenges associated with rapid urbanization. India, China, and Nigeria are
home to the largest number of people at high risk, collectively accounting for
over 570 million individuals. Fast-growing economies like Bangladesh, Brazil,
Indonesia, and Pakistan each have over 30 million people at high risk. The
gender disparity persists, with an estimated 414 million women at high risk in
the top 10 countries combined (see Figure 3). In Africa and Asia, the proportion
of the population at high risk remains alarming. For instance, in ten African
countries, over 50% of the population faces high risk. >A table with numbers and
a number of people Description automatically generated< Figure 3: Top 10
countries with rural and urban poor population at high risk (2023) Chilling
Prospects identifies 2.90 billion lower-middle-income people at medium risk,
representing an increasingly affluent class ready to purchase cooling solutions.
This segment faces challenges in selecting sustainable and affordable options,
potentially leading to inefficient technologies and increased energy
consumption. The number of people at medium risk increased by approximately 11
million between 2022 and 2023, primarily in South Asia, Nigeria, and Yemen.
Around 958.7 million individuals within the middle-income population are at low
risk. This means the population might typically own air conditioners and
refrigerators. This group, living on USD 10.01 to USD 20 per day, exhibits a
positive trend in access. The number of people at low risk increased by
approximately 56.8 million from 2022 to 2023, showcasing a return to growth
after a decline during the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. The "Chilling
Prospects" initiative presents a snapshot of the global access gap to cooling
technologies. While progress has been made in reducing the number of people at
high risk, major challenges persist, especially in rapidly urbanizing regions
and with regards to the unique vulnerabilities faced by women. Addressing these
challenges requires a holistic approach that combines efforts to improve
electricity access, housing quality, and the affordability of efficient cooling
solutions. The data underscores the importance of tailored interventions to
ensure sustainable and equitable access to cooling technologies worldwide. 4)
Urban-Rural Divide The global energy landscape is marked by a profound disparity
in access to energy resources, chiefly manifested between rich and poor
countries as well as within countries between rural and urban areas. This divide
has far-reaching implications for economic development, quality of life, and
overall societal progress. In urban areas, energy sources are often more
reliable and diverse compared to rural counterparts. Urban centers are more
likely to have well-established electricity grids, enabling residents to access
a continuous and stable power supply. Additionally, a variety of energy
services, such as heating, cooling, and cooking, are readily available due to
the concentration of infrastructure and service providers. The prevalence of
modern energy solutions in urban settings contributes to improved living
standards, facilitates economic activities, and supports the overall dynamism of
urban life. In stark contrast, rural areas often grapple with significant
challenges in accessing reliable and sustainable energy sources. Many rural
communities, especially in developing countries, still rely on traditional and
often inefficient energy sources like biomass, kerosene, or even open fires for
cooking and heating. The lack of electricity infrastructure in rural areas
hampers not only domestic activities but also limits opportunities for
education, healthcare, and economic development. In 2021, urban areas globally
achieved an impressive 98% electrification rate, surpassing rural areas where
only 85% had access to electricity (see Figure 4). Notably, between 2019 and
2021, there was a notable acceleration in rural electrification, witnessing a
yearly increase of 33 million people gaining access—an advancement that exceeded
population growth. This remarkable trend was particularly prominent in Central
and Southern Asia. However, Sub-Saharan Africa faced a contrasting scenario, as
rural electrification progress failed to keep pace with population growth,
leaving over 80% of the 524 million rural inhabitants without electricity in
2021. In Eastern and South-eastern Asia, the annual growth in the number of
connected rural residents experienced a slowdown, attributed to the gradual
decline in the overall rural population. Conversely, in Northern Africa and
Western Asia, the expansion of rural access kept abreast of population growth,
reflecting a commendable effort to extend electricity infrastructure to remote
areas. These regional variations underline the diverse challenges and successes
in the global pursuit of universal electrification, emphasizing the need for
targeted strategies to address specific regional disparities and accelerate
progress in ensuring energy access for all. Figure 4: Increases in global access
to electricity in urban and rural areas, 2010, 2019, and 2021 (World Bank 2023)
Further, there is another dimension to the discussion: informality. UN-Habitat
estimates that approximately 1 billion people worldwide are living in slums and
informal settlements, with some research suggesting that the actual number may
be even higher. The UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs estimates that
in the subsequent three decades, up to an additional 2 billion individuals,
mostly in developing countries, are anticipated to live in urban slums (or slum-
like conditions). While not every individual in these slum areas faces
electricity access challenges, the available evidence strongly suggests that a
substantial proportion of them grapple with unreliable, unsafe, and inadequate
energy services. It is important to note that the 675 million figure encompasses
both rural and urban areas, while most slum-dwelling populations are
concentrated in urban environments. In countries like Argentina, for instance,
the proportion of the population living in slums and informal settlements has
currently decreased to 10%. However, at least half of that population has
informal access to electricity. This contrasts with the estimated 100% access
observed in the electricity access statistics. These nuances emphasize the need
for a more comprehensive understanding of the energy access landscape,
acknowledging the vulnerabilities that persist in the shadows of these
statistics. Similarly, significant disparities in access to clean cooking fuels
and technologies persist on a global scale, with urban areas generally enjoying
greater access than rural counterparts, although the gap is gradually closing.
In the past decade, urban areas witnessed a modest increase in access to clean
cooking, rising from 82% in 2010 to 86% in 2021, primarily due to a higher
initial baseline. In contrast, rural areas experienced a more substantial
improvement, with access levels climbing from 31% to 51% over the same period.
The urban-rural gap in clean cooking access, which stood at around 50 percentage
points between 2000 and 2010, has notably narrowed to 35 percentage points by
2021. If current trends persist, it is projected to further decrease to 23
percentage points by 2030. This positive shift underscores a gradual but
impactful improvement in extending clean cooking solutions to rural communities.
A notable evolution in the fuel mix of many developing countries appears to be
underway, marked by a transition from unprocessed biomass to gas, particularly
evident around 2010 with the rapid expansion of LPG programs in India,
Indonesia, and Peru. However, despite this transition, rural areas globally
still heavily rely on biomass, serving as the primary cooking fuel for 49% of
people (1.5 billion) in 2021, surpassing all other fuel types. While the use of
unprocessed biomass may be on the decline in both urban and rural areas, a
persistent reliance on charcoal is observed, especially in some urban areas of
Sub-Saharan Africa. In 2021, charcoal was the primary cooking fuel for 30% of
people, totaling 140 million individuals. This nuanced shift in cooking fuel
dynamics emphasizes the need for targeted interventions and sustained efforts to
accelerate the adoption of cleaner and more sustainable cooking technologies in
both urban and rural settings. Several factors contribute to the energy access
gap in rural areas. Geographic remoteness often makes it economically unviable
to extend centralized electricity grids to these locations. Limited financial
resources, coupled with challenging terrain, hinder the implementation of large-
scale energy projects. Additionally, the absence of incentives for private
investment further exacerbates the energy deficit in rural regions. Efforts to
bridge the urban-rural energy access gap require a multi-faceted approach that
addresses the unique challenges faced by each setting. This involves a
combination of policy interventions, technological innovations, and community
engagement. 2) Understanding Challenges in Energy Access 1)    Limited
Infrastructure The energy access gap persisting—and in some cases widening—in
the Global South arises from a confluence of factors. One prominent obstacle is
the limited infrastructure, characterized by the absence, or poor state, of
extensive national transmission and distribution networks alongside inadequate
generation capacity. This shortfall hampers endeavors to extend energy access to
underserved communities. Moreover, supply disruptions pose a formidable barrier.
Issues such as pipeline damage, geopolitical tensions, price fluctuations and
even climate events disrupt energy source operations, leading to
underutilization and jeopardizing the secure electricity supply to vulnerable
populations. Economic barriers further compound the challenge. Limited power
generation capacity, maintenance complexities, and uncertainties in fuel
provisioning exacerbate unmet national energy demands, perpetuating issues with
supply reliability and exacerbating the energy access gap. 2)     Financial
Barriers Limited Funding Opportunities One hurdle to achieving universal access
to electricity is a lack of funding for off-grid, sustainable energy solutions
that can extend electricity to last-mile communities. Estimates indicate a
substantial financial requirement, ranging from US$35 billion to US$40 billion
annually between 2021 and 2030, to realize universal access to electricity. In
2022, global investment in renewable energy reached a record of USD 0.5
trillion, showcasing the growing momentum towards cleaner energy sources. This
increase is part of the broader energy transition investment, which hit $1.8
trillion in 2023, marking a 17% rise from the previous year and setting a new
record. This transition encompasses not just renewables but also other clean
energy technologies like energy storage, nuclear, hydrogen, and carbon capture​.
However, despite these record investments, there is a significant gap between
current levels of funding and what is needed to achieve the 1.5°C Scenario
outlined by the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA). According to
IRENA's projections, annual investments in renewable energy must quadruple,
highlighting the urgent need for a massive increase in investment, especially in
less mature technologies and sectors beyond electricity, like heating, cooling,
and system integration​. The disparities in investment flows are striking. More
than half of the world's population, primarily in developing and emerging
countries, received only 15% of global investments in renewables in 2020, with
Sub-Saharan Africa getting less than 1.5% of global investments between 2000 and
2020. Investment per capita in regions like Europe and North America far exceeds
that in Sub-Saharan Africa, underscoring the need for a more equitable
distribution of finance​. UNCTAD's World Investment Report 2023 further
illustrates the challenges faced by developing countries in attracting
sufficient investment for clean energy. While developing countries require about
$1.7 trillion annually in renewable energy investments, they attracted only $544
billion in 2022. This imbalance perpetuates reliance on traditional energy
sources, impeding progress in narrowing the energy access gap. This investment
gap is a critical barrier to achieving climate goals and underscores the need
for increased support and innovative financing mechanisms to de-risk energy
transition investments in these regions​. This uneven distribution of investment
highlights the need for policymakers to address barriers that hold back
investment in many countries, such as higher interest rates, unclear policy
frameworks, and a high cost of capital. To confront these challenges and
mitigate the energy access gap, concerted efforts must focus on bolstering
infrastructure, ensuring a reliable energy supply, addressing economic barriers,
increasing investments in renewable energy, and expediting the technical
deployment of clean energy technologies in the global south. While public
financing will continue to play a key role, there is a need to deploy commercial
capital to bridge the investment gap and realize universal access to
electricity, particularly in remote rural areas. These areas are often perceived
as too risky by private investors, highlighting the necessity for innovative
financial solutions and strategic government action. Financial Inaccessibility
for Vulnerable Communities Achieving universal energy access is inseparable from
the question of affordability, recognizing that income disparities and the
purchasing power of diverse communities significantly impact the feasibility of
energy services. Lack of affordable energy exacerbates existing disparities and
hinders progress toward sustainable development goals. This multifaceted
challenge encompasses various dimensions, including the upfront costs of energy
infrastructure, ongoing operational expenses, and the economic capacity of
individuals and communities. The initial investment required for establishing
energy infrastructure often presents a significant hurdle, especially for
impoverished states and marginalized communities. The cost of installing solar
panels, building power grids, or implementing clean cooking solutions can be
prohibitively high- often because the cost of capital is so steep. This
financial barrier, particularly in impoverished regions, impedes the development
of essential energy infrastructure. Beyond the initial setup, ongoing
operational expenses can further strain the affordability of energy access. The
maintenance, fuel, and service costs associated with energy technologies
contribute to the financial burden faced by communities, especially when the
cost of energy itself is often not only high but also marked by volatility which
is particularly challenging for the poorest to deal with. The ongoing financial
commitments associated with operational costs and recurrent consumption may
deter the adoption of cleaner and more sustainable energy solutions,
particularly in communities with limited disposable income. The burden of
disproportionately high energy costs can exacerbate existing inequalities,
forcing individuals to allocate a substantial portion of their income to meet
basic energy needs, leaving them with fewer resources for other essential
necessities. 3)      Data and Information Gaps Global estimations predominantly
revolve around the availability aspect of electricity access. This is primarily
because monitoring the other facets of access mentioned earlier presents
additional challenges. In terms of affordability, the concept of fuel poverty
offers valuable insights into monitoring households' energy expenditures
relative to their total income. However, there is no comprehensive tracking of
fuel poverty indexes on a global scale. Most of the existing fuel poverty
indexes are assessed at the national level, with limited efforts to apply them
regionally. It is worth noting that fuel poverty indexes are almost always based
on data from households that already have formal energy access. However, there
are notable exceptions, such as a study conducted in Argentina in 2021, which
focused on communities that are able to use electricity through informal means,
shedding light on energy affordability in underserved areas. Fuel poverty
metrics often consider factors such as household income, energy prices, and
energy efficiency, providing a quantitative framework for evaluating the extent
of energy affordability challenges in a given population. This enables the
identification of vulnerable groups and the tailoring of interventions to meet
their specific needs, contributing to more effective and inclusive energy access
strategies. While the concept of fuel poverty is a valuable tool for assessing
energy access, it does have its limitations. The metrics used to quantify fuel
poverty often vary across regions and countries, and a one-size-fits-all
approach may not capture the nuanced socio-economic dynamics that influence
energy affordability. Cultural, climatic, and regional differences impact the
cost of energy services and the income required to afford them, making it
challenging to establish universal benchmarks for fuel poverty. Moreover,
focusing solely on affordability may overlook other dimensions of energy
poverty, such as reliability, safety, and environmental sustainability.
Additionally, the absence of comprehensive cross-sectional data encompassing
socioeconomic factors, including gender dynamics, poses challenges for equitable
and inclusive energy strategies. Without accurate data, it becomes difficult to
identify and address the specific needs and barriers faced by marginalized
groups. Besides, a lack of understanding on consumer preference in developing
countries can hinder the design of socially acceptable energy access solutions.
Given that consumer preferences may vary depending on geographic location and
culture, obtaining such data is important. A comprehensive approach to energy
access should incorporate all these multidimensional factors to ensure a
holistic understanding of the challenges faced by communities in securing clean
and sustainable energy services. Box 2: Energy Poverty Indexes Energy poverty
indexes are invaluable tools for evaluating and addressing the complexities of
energy access challenges and disparities. While defining and measuring Energy
Poverty (EP), it is common for the focus to gravitate toward economic aspects,
leading to the selection of economic indicators as key measures. However, a
comprehensive understanding of energy poverty necessitates a multidimensional
approach, considering also social and environmental elements. Inclusive EP
measurement systems must encompass all three dimensions to offer a holistic
perspective. By doing so, EP indicators can reflect the multifaceted concerns
that underlie energy poverty, ensuring that interventions and policies
effectively address the challenges. Some scientific studies of energy poverty
focus on the social and health impacts of EP, while others examine geographical
disparities, economic factors, and political initiatives. The incorporation of
geospatial data and analysis is a prevailing trend in many energy poverty
indexes. This approach involves mapping energy access disparities by location,
enabling the identification of areas with the most acute energy deficits. Such
geospatial insights facilitate the development of precisely targeted
interventions, ensuring that underserved communities benefit effectively from
energy access initiatives. Additionally, energy poverty indexes may include
surveys or assessments that consider individual-level factors such as household
income, energy consumption patterns, and living conditions. These detailed
insights are pivotal for the tailoring of policies and interventions, ensuring
that they resonate with the specific needs of populations. The versatility of
energy poverty indexes extends to various applications, making them
indispensable tools in energy access-related research and policymaking: --
Policy Guidance: Energy poverty indexes play a pivotal role in shaping energy
policies and initiatives. By identifying the most substantial barriers to energy
access, these indexes empower policymakers to formulate targeted strategies that
effectively mitigate energy poverty. -- Data-Driven Decision-Making: Energy
poverty indexes generate substantial data and evidence, enriching decision-
making processes. Policymakers, international organizations, and energy
providers rely on this data to allocate resources efficiently and design
programs tailored to the unique requirements of energy-deprived communities. --
Research and Advocacy: Energy poverty indexes support in-depth studies exploring
the causes and consequences of energy poverty. Advocacy organizations leverage
these indexes to raise awareness and mobilize support for the alleviation of
energy access challenges. --       Tracking Progress: Routine monitoring using
energy poverty indexes is essential for assessing progress toward the
realization of Sustainable Development Goal 7 (SDG 7) - Affordable and Clean
Energy. These indexes serve as barometers for evaluating whether countries are
on track to achieve universal access to modern energy services by 2030, as
outlined in the SDGs. --       Global Comparisons: Energy poverty indexes extend
beyond local and national contexts, offering a means to compare and benchmark
energy access progress on a global scale. This comparative analysis enables
countries to gauge their energy access achievements in relation to other
countries, fostering a culture of shared knowledge and improvement. 3.4.
Energy Poverty and Reproduction of Inequalities Energy poverty is not a
standalone issue; rather, it intertwines with a web of other inequalities,
exacerbating and perpetuating its detrimental effects. Economic disparities
contribute to resource scarcity and heightened energy vulnerability. The
phenomenon of the feminization of poverty further amplifies the urgency of
addressing gender disparities in energy access. Women, often disproportionately
affected by poverty, find themselves at the forefront of the adverse impacts of
inadequate energy resources. The responsibilities traditionally assigned to
women and children in households, such as cooking and collecting firewood, not
only limit their economic opportunities but also expose them to heightened
health risks due to the use of polluting fuels and technologies. The
consequences of these challenges are substantial, with household air pollution
being a major health concern that can often have lethal consequences. Exposure
to polluting fuels and technologies in homes has been linked to noncommunicable
diseases, including stroke, ischemic heart disease, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD), and lung cancer. Women and children, shouldering the
primary burden of household chores and domestic responsibilities, bear the brunt
of these health risks, underscoring the urgency of transitioning to cleaner and
safer energy sources. Acknowledging and understanding these intricate dynamics
are pivotal in formulating holistic and effective solutions. Similarly, the lack
of affordable energy is intricately linked to other barriers to prosperity and
well-being, such as wanting access to education and healthcare. Take, for
instance, access to running water, which is critical for hygiene, sanitation,
and overall health. In numerous regions, the availability of energy (usually
diesel generators) is fundamental for water pumping, particularly in rural or
underserved communities. In the absence of reliable energy sources, ensuring the
provision of clean and easily accessible water becomes an imposing challenge,
with direct consequences for the fulfillment of SDG 6, dedicated to clean water
and sanitation. A parallel scenario unfolds in underserved communities in cold
climates or regions with harsh winter seasons. Here, the availability of
sanitary hot water for personal hygiene, coupled with effective heating, is an
essential safeguard for survival and well-being. This is especially critical in
climates where exposure to extreme cold can result in a range of health issues
such as frostbite or hypothermia. This synergy illuminates the profound impact
of energy access on achieving the objectives of SDG 3, focused on promoting good
health and well-being. Furthermore, limited access to affordable energy can
hinder educational opportunities, as students may lack adequate lighting for
studying. Additionally, healthcare services relying on energy, such as
refrigeration for vaccines or medical equipment, can be compromised in areas
where energy is not affordable. 3)      Unlocking Opportunities Through
Sustainable Energy Access The ramifications of energy access stretch far beyond
the glow of a well-lit room or the hum of a refrigerator. Energy, or the lack
thereof, is intricately woven into the fabric of society and the dynamics of
economies. Sustainable energy access sits at the center of a complex tapestry of
essential services pivotal for enhancing the quality of life. It is intricately
linked to several Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), with a particularly
strong correlation observed with SDG 1 (No Poverty) and SDG 8 (Decent Work and
Economic Growth). Recognizing the intricate interplay among these services
underscores the need for comprehensive and sustainable solutions that cater to
various facets of human development. 1)        Poverty Reduction and Economic
Development Poverty, often stemming from multifaceted economic and sociocultural
systems, can be alleviated through improved energy access. In other words,
energy access plays a vital role in breaking the cycles of poverty, isolation,
and deprivation. Access to reliable energy plays a pivotal role in boosting
economic development. By powering industries, businesses, and essential
services, energy access helps propel economic growth, productivity and poverty
reduction. One significant benefit of improved energy access is the empowerment
of local entrepreneurs and small businesses. Access to electricity enables
individuals to establish and operate small-scale enterprises, including shops,
restaurants, manufacturing workshops, and service centers. Electricity-powered
machinery and equipment enhance productivity, expand business operations, and
create employment opportunities within the community. Additionally, access to
electricity can facilitate the adoption of modern technologies and digital
platforms, enabling entrepreneurs to access new markets, streamline business
processes, and improve competitiveness. In agriculture, energy access is a game-
changer. Farmers can use electric pumps for irrigation, enhancing crop yields
and diversifying their agricultural activities. Cold storage powered by
electricity ensures that produce remains fresh and marketable for longer
periods. Additionally, post-harvest processing and value addition, such as food
preservation and packaging, become possible, increasing the income generated by
agricultural activities. By supporting livelihoods, enhancing economic
opportunities, and improving overall well-being, energy access empowers
communities to uplift themselves economically. While it is essential to
recognize that energy access is not a panacea for poverty reduction, it
undoubtedly contributes significantly to breaking the cycle of poverty. 2)
Improving Health Outcomes One of the most significant and far-reaching outcomes
of improved energy access is its transformative impact on health. Clean cooking
and reliable access to electricity have the power to drive substantial
improvements in the overall well-being of individuals and communities. The
introduction of clean cooking solutions, through the adoption of technologies
like improved cookstoves, biogas, and electric cooking appliances, can
significantly reduce indoor air pollution and therefore, also the disease
burden. As a result, households experience a notable decrease in the
concentration of harmful particulate matter and toxic fumes, leading to fewer
respiratory problems and better lung health. Highlighting the urgency of this
issue, a WHO study finds that 4.3 million people die a year prematurely due to
household air pollution caused by the use of less clean energy forms. Moreover,
clean cooking reduces global emissions, as more than 2% of emissions result from
forest degradation and burning wood fuels. Modern, efficient stoves can reduce
fuel consumption and emissions while preventing further degradation of forests
and ecosystems, positively impacting the environment. Women and children
(especially girls), who are often the most exposed to these pollutants, benefit
greatly from this reduction in indoor air pollution. By reducing exposure to
indoor air pollution, these energy interventions offer not only immediate health
benefits but also long-term health advantages, as respiratory issues become less
prevalent, and their associated healthcare costs decrease. Moreover, clean
cooking facilities enable families to prepare meals safely, contributing to
better maternal and child well-being. Hospitals, as vital hubs of healthcare
delivery, depend on reliable electricity to power life-saving medical equipment,
maintain optimal temperature conditions for vaccines and medicines in cold
storage facilities, and ensure adequate lighting for surgeries, examinations,
and patient care areas. With enhanced energy access, hospitals can operate more
efficiently, reducing the risk of medical emergencies due to power outages and
improving patient outcomes, directly impacting SDG 3. Without a dependable and
adequate energy supply, the quality of healthcare is compromised, putting lives
at risk. Research indicates that delays in receiving obstetric care, often
caused by power outages, are associated with poor maternal health and infant
outcomes. Specifically, reliable electricity sources facilitate safe and well-
lit environments for childbirth and neonatal care in healthcare facilities. More
than 53% of infant mortality rates could be traced to poor environmental
quality, and a lack of quality energy contributes to increased health-related
risks such as pneumonia and non-communicable diseases. Case Study 1: RBAS: Solar
for Health – Yemen Case Study RBAS: Solar for Health – Yemen – (Melody) Focus
Region: RBAS (Also operating in Sub-Saharan Africa and Nepal, but emphasis is on
Yemen for this study) Focus Country: Yemen Main Discussion Points: -- Use as a
case study for Chapter 3 (Energy Access as a Driver for Sustainable
Development), Section 3.3 (Community Development and Collective Benefits). --
Overview of the program and key elements, then move to the Yemeni context. --
Importance of reliable energy access for local institutions. -- Impacts of
conflict on the quality of healthcare systems. --    Significance of considering
energy access beyond the household level. --        Financing model of the
program. 3)      Empowering Education Electricity is indispensable in schools
for providing adequate lighting in classrooms, libraries, and study areas,
creating a conducive learning environment. Reliable access to electricity
significantly extends study hours. With the advent of clean and sustainable
energy solutions, such as solar-powered lamps and home systems, students can
continue their studies well into the night, or early in the morning. This not
only fosters a conducive learning environment but also enhances the quality of
education and academic performance, contributing significantly to the attainment
of SDG 4. Further, access to electricity and technology enables students to
access digital learning resources, such as online educational platforms,
e-books, and multimedia content. Digital learning can open up new avenues for
students, broaden their horizons and equip them with skills necessary for the
modern world. 4)      Advancing Gender Equality Empowering women and girls is
intrinsically linked to energy access. Electricity can play a significant role
in reducing the gender gap in education and income. When households have access
to electricity, it helps lessen the burden on women and girls, who often spend
hours collecting firewood and engaging in other time-consuming, energy-intensive
tasks. This shift allows girls to spend more time on their education and women
to pursue income-generating activities. Moreover, electrification improves
safety and security in homes and communities, reducing the risk of gender-based
violence. Case Study 2: RBPAP: Climate Saathis. Women act to make slums climate-
resilient. Case Study: RABP: Climate Saathis. Women act to make slums climate-
resilient Location: India (South Asia) Over 215 million people in urban India,
including 121 million women in impoverished urban areas and slums39, are at high
risk due to a lack of access to cooling services. In response to this critical
issue, the Mahila Housing Trust (MHT) has spearheaded the Climate Saathis
project, empowering women in slums to become climate advocates, or "friends"
(Saathis in Hindi). The core premise of the Climate Saathis initiative is rooted
in the belief that equipping urban poor communities, particularly women, with
knowledge, tools, and leadership skills enables them to devise and implement
local climate-resilient solutions effectively. Through the project, women are
trained as energy auditors, encouraging households to adopt more energy-
efficient lighting, fans, and cooling devices. They also emerge as grassroots-
level micro-entrepreneurs, forming a women-led distribution network for
efficient and off-grid products. The program extends beyond product promotion,
emphasizing education on various energy-related aspects, including interpreting
electricity bills, calculating energy consumption, and identifying sources of
energy wastage. Additionally, participants are encouraged to promote the use of
building materials and technologies that reduce heat, such as passive cooling
solutions like white roofs, which can lower home temperatures by up to 6°C. The
impact of the Climate Saathis project has been substantial. Approximately 28,000
energy audits have been conducted in slum communities, resulting in an annual
electricity cost savings of over USD 700,000 for families. This initiative has
facilitated the installation of 200 modular roofs and 500 roofs with solar-
reflective white paint, contributing to a noteworthy reduction of 105 tons of
carbon dioxide equivalent per year. One exemplary aspect of the project is its
integration of women into various facets of climate resilience. From becoming
energy auditors to forming Community Action Groups (CAG) and acting as leaders
or Vikasinis, women play multifaceted roles. These Vikasinis participate in
stakeholder meetings with local authorities, institutes, and society members,
effectively addressing local issues and influencing positive change. The
significance of the Climate Saathis project extends beyond its immediate
outcomes. It serves as a compelling model for grassroots-level initiatives that
can make a tangible difference in climate change mitigation. Recognizing the
pivotal role of women in building climate resilience, particularly in informal
settlements, the project has become a beacon of effective community-led action.
The transformative impact of the Climate Saathis project is evident in real-life
examples. Houses once enduring temperatures reaching up to 50 degrees Celsius
have now adopted cooling roofs made from sustainable materials, drastically
reducing indoor temperatures. These tangible changes have improved living
conditions, enhanced health, and even provided a platform for income-generating
activities, such as home-run businesses. In essence, the Climate Saathis project
demonstrates the potential of community-driven, women-led initiatives in
addressing climate challenges. By combining education, entrepreneurship, and
advocacy, this project not only transforms physical living spaces but also
empowers women to be agents of change within their communities. As urban centers
grapple with the intensifying impacts of climate change, the Climate Saathis
model stands as a compelling example of resilience, sustainability, and
meaningful community engagement. The Mahila Housing Trust, the organization
behind the initiative, received the 2019 United Nations Global Climate Action
Awards at the United Nations Climate Change Conference in 2019. This serves as a
testament to the project’s effectiveness in addressing pressing climate change
issues, such as heat stress and flooding, through innovative and community-
driven approaches. 5)      Fostering Community Development Central to the
prosperity and well-being of entire communities, improved energy access extends
beyond the confines of individual households and institutional settings to
encompass public spaces and thoroughfares. Street lighting, for instance, plays
a crucial role in enhancing public safety and security by illuminating roads,
sidewalks, and public areas, reducing the risk of accidents, crime, and
violence. Well-lit streets also promote social cohesion and community engagement
by creating inviting spaces for social gatherings, recreational/sports
activities, and commerce, especially during evening hours. Allowing businesses
to operate after dark bolsters local economies and enhances recreational
activities. This aspect of public lighting not only aligns with SDG 8 (Decent
Work and Economic Growth) but also plays a pivotal role in shaping a community's
energy access profile. Consequently, investing in street lighting infrastructure
as part of efforts to improve energy access can significantly enhance the
livability, inclusivity, and vibrancy of urban and rural communities alike.
Similarly, electricity enables the establishment of community-owned and operated
facilities such as community centers, sports venues, parks, and libraries. These
institutions serve as hubs for community gatherings, social events, and
educational programs, fostering unity and solidarity among residents. By
providing spaces for dialogue and collective decision-making, community-owned
facilities empower individuals to voice their opinions, express their needs, and
contribute to shaping the future of their communities. Furthermore, improved
energy access plays a vital role in community empowerment and participation in
decision-making processes, contributing to socio-economic development and
overall well-being. Reliable electricity enhances communication and
connectivity, enabling community members to engage in dialogue, exchange
information, and collaborate on collective endeavors. Electricity-powered
communication tools such as televisions, radios, and mobile phones facilitate
information dissemination, enabling communities to stay informed, participate in
public consultations, and advocate for their interests. However, it is crucial
to recognize that these examples merely scratch the surface of communal energy
needs. Communities, particularly agricultural ones, have specific energy
requirements tailored to their distinct activities, which may starkly contrast
with those of urban informal settlements, for instance. It is imperative to
establish mechanisms for a comprehensive understanding of each context and
associated tailored policy response, acknowledging its unique characteristics
and idiosyncrasies. By adopting this nuanced approach, we can ensure that energy
solutions are finely tuned to the diverse needs of different communities,
fostering inclusive development that genuinely resonates with the people it
serves. 4)        Bridging the Energy Access Gap This chapter serves as a basic
guide for building energy systems that revolve around well-being,
sustainability, and justice. In our exploration, we will discuss innovative
solutions for energy access, policy mechanisms to expand energy access, the
pivotal roles of partnerships and stakeholders, community-based approaches, and
a deeper dive into the crucial aspects of affordability, inclusivity, and an
intersectional approach. 1)        Intersectional Approach An intersectional
approach to energy access involves recognizing and addressing the interconnected
and overlapping nature of various social identities, such as gender, ethnicity,
race, socioeconomic status, and geographical location when formulating policies
and interventions. By acknowledging the diverse challenges faced by individuals
who exist at the crossroads of multiple marginalized identities, this approach
aims to create more nuanced, effective, and inclusive strategies for ensuring
universal energy access. Intersectionality, a term coined by legal scholar
Kimberlé Crenshaw, emphasizes the interplay of various social categories and how
they intersect to shape an individual's experience of privilege or oppression,
meaning vulnerabilities are not singular but emerge from the convergence of
multiple contextual factors. Neglecting an intersectional approach in the
context of energy access can have significant negative consequences,
perpetuating inequalities and leaving certain groups disproportionately
underserved. For example: --      Gender Disparities: Failing to consider the
unique challenges faced by women struggling with energy poverty can result in
solutions that do not address their specific needs. Women, who often bear the
responsibility for household energy tasks, may face safety risks, health issues,
and limited economic opportunities when energy interventions are not tailored to
their experiences and realities. It is imperative to recognize and address these
disparities comprehensively, ensuring that energy solutions are gender-
responsive. Doing so is not just about achieving energy access; it is about
fostering an equitable energy future that empowers women, giving them chances to
more fully, more actively and more equitably participate in social and economic
life. In essence, recognizing the intricate connection between gender and energy
access is not only an ethical imperative but also a strategic investment in the
well-being of communities. By prioritizing gender-responsive solutions, we not
only mitigate health risks but also unlock the full potential of women,
fostering a more inclusive and sustainable energy future. --     Rural-Urban
Divide: Overlooking the rural-urban intersection may lead to the neglect of the
multitude of distinct challenges faced by rural communities. Rural areas may
encounter difficulties in grid extension, face higher upfront costs for
decentralized energy solutions, and contend with limited economic opportunities
and discrimination, exacerbating energy poverty and development disparities vis-
à-vis urban areas. -- Ethnic and Socioeconomic Disparities: Communities facing
ethnic and socioeconomic marginalization may be disproportionately affected by
energy poverty. Without an intersectional lens, interventions may not adequately
account for historical injustices, ongoing discrimination, or cultural contexts
and prejudices that shape these communities' energy access challenges. Embracing
an intersectional approach to energy access brings several advantages. It makes
it more likely that policies and interventions are tailored to the various needs
and challenges faced by diverse communities, fostering inclusivity and promoting
equitable outcomes. Key benefits include (but are not limited to): --
Addressing Root Causes: By understanding the specific challenges faced by
different groups, interventions can be designed to address the root causes of
energy poverty, whether they stem from gender-based roles, geographic
constraints, socioeconomic disparities or other factors. --       Community
Engagement: An intersectional approach encourages active engagement with
communities, allowing for the co-creation of solutions that respect local
cultures, values, and social dynamics. This collaboration enhances the
sustainability and social acceptance of energy projects and gives them greater
political legitimacy. --     Maximizing Impact: Considering the interconnected
nature of social identities ensures that interventions have a broader impact,
reaching and benefiting a more diverse range of individuals. This approach
contributes to the achievement of broader sustainable development goals. 2)
Technological Solutions Both new and existing technological developments can
play a pivotal role in shaping the landscape of energy generation and
transformation, as well as improving energy efficiency. Remarkably, many of
these solutions operate on a dual front, simultaneously advancing both aspects
of energy access. This is particularly critical in remote communities, where
access to energy remains a significant challenge. For instance, around 60% of
Africans reside in rural communities, with approximately 5% having access to
clean energy. Off-grid renewable energy systems have proven to be one of the
best-known solutions to expanding energy access in these underserved areas. This
category encompasses a diverse array of solutions that are reshaping the
provision of reliable electricity, particularly in remote and underserved
regions. Within this category, solar home systems and mini-grids play a crucial
role in providing electrical access. Solar Home Systems, often abbreviated as
SHS, are portable, stand-alone solar power units that usher in a new era of
clean and reliable electricity. They have the potential to transform the lives
of millions living in areas with sporadic or no access to the conventional grid,
transcending the geographical limitations of traditional grid infrastructure. On
the other hand, mini-grids present a localized and decentralized energy
distribution system that connects multiple consumers to a central power source.
Mini-grids are appropriate for remote and underserved communities, offering a
robust and sustainable energy solution that surpasses the reach of traditional
grid extensions. Mini-grids can be a game-changer in the quest for energy
access, extending their influence far beyond mere illumination. For example,
Bangladesh exemplifies the successful deployment of these technologies, with
over 6 million SHS installed in off-grid areas and over 26 solar mini-grids
serving approximately 16,000 beneficiaries in rural areas. However, technology-
driven energy solutions do not stop at providing access to electricity.
Renewable technologies are proving to be versatile in addressing multiple
fundamental needs. For instance, access to sanitary hot water, cooling for
housing, and cooking, traditionally met through conventional energy sources, can
effectively be addressed by solar-powered water heaters, solar stoves, and
bioclimatic construction methods. To illustrate, well-insulated homes with
proper ventilation and energy-efficient windows can significantly reduce the
need for excessive ventilation, heating or cooling. Bioclimatic building
technologies take this a step further by integrating design principles that
leverage the local climate and natural elements to enhance thermal comfort.
Strategies like passive solar heating, natural ventilation, and shading devices
can minimize the reliance on external energy sources for temperature control. By
aligning housing design with the surrounding climate, bioclimatic approaches not
only improve energy efficiency but also reduce demand for additional heating or
cooling. Beyond these traditional solutions, various other technological
innovations are emerging, ranging from smart meters and energy-efficient
appliances to advanced battery storage systems and decentralized energy
generation, all contributing to expanding energy access on a global scale. Case
Study 3: RBEC: UNDP Energy Efficiency Project in Kazakhstan Case Study RBEC:
UNDP Energy Efficiency Project in Kazakhstan – (Balgerim) Focus Region: RBEC
Focus Country: Kazakhstan Reference Link: <a
href="https://www.undp.org/kazakhstan/press-releases/more-300000-people-
kazakhstan-now-live-and-work-more-comfortable-
conditions">https://www.undp.org/kazakhstan/press-releases/more-300000-people-
kazakhstan-now-live-and-work-more-comfortable-conditions</a> --  Use this as a
case study for Chapter 1, Section 1.2 (The Concept of Energy Poverty),
illustrating how energy poverty can be addressed by improving housing conditions
as well. --       Emphasize replicable lessons learned from this experience. --
UNDP is implementing similar energy efficiency and energy-saving solutions in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Moldova, Uzbekistan and Ukraine (try referencing those)
While these solutions offer clean energy, they come with challenges. Firstly,
their initial cost can be prohibitively high for communities with limited
financial resources. Additionally, these systems require regular maintenance and
repairs, which may be challenging to provide in remote areas. Their
intermittency, dependent on weather conditions, further underscores the
complexities associated with their implementation. Battery storage can tackle
this issue, but it also adds to the expense. Case Study 4: RBA: Africa Minigrids
Program (AMP) – Eswatini Case Study RBA: Africa Minigrids Program (AMP) –
Eswatini (Christian) Focus Region: RBA Focus Countries: Eswatini Main Discussion
Points: -- Use as a case study for Chapter 4 (Strategies for Overcoming Energy
Access Challenges), Section 4.1 (Main Approaches for Energy Access). Take into
consideration the 3 approaches discussed in the section (Technological,
financial and policy-driven solutions), considering how AMP has all of those
approaches. --  If possible, organize the writing into three small sections:
Program Overview, Technological Aspects, and Financial Strategies. --
Address current comments from reviewers, condensing the content to fit within 1
page (you may remove the map if necessary). --  Highlight Eswatini's specific
characteristics, such as its impact on energy independence. --    Optional: AMP
has a gender action plan and projects need to develop their own GAPs prior to
implementation. Would be good to expand this aspect to recognize the program's
structure to integrate gender equality in their work. 3)     Financing
Mechanisms The financial front plays a pivotal role in promoting energy access,
sustainable energies, and off-grid initiatives. Innovative financing strategies
are instrumental in overcoming the financial barriers that have hindered the
energy access journey. These strategies focus on two key aspects: the energy
services providers and the final users who rely on these services. For the
energy services providers, tailored financial mechanisms play a pivotal role in
unlocking the capital necessary for the development of sustainable and inclusive
energy projects. These mechanisms not only foster the growth of clean energy
initiatives but also ensure that energy providers can operate efficiently and
expand their reach, ultimately bringing energy access to a broader populace. At
the user level, innovative financial approaches work to make energy services
more accessible and affordable. Microfinance schemes, for instance, can empower
individuals, communities and local governments by granting them access to
affordable credit, enabling them to acquire clean energy solutions. This
approach streamlines the transition away from traditional, less efficient energy
sources. Pay-as-you-go (PAYG) models have witnessed a surge in popularity,
offering consumers the flexibility of making incremental payments for energy
services, rendering them more accessible and budget-friendly. An example is Sun
King (previously Greenlight Planet), operating in Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and
Uganda, enabling most customers to make roughly 60 mobile money payments between
USD 2 and USD 5 each over a period of 12 to 24 months to complete their
instalment payment plans for a solar home system that provides electricity to
their home. This frees users from having to pay high upfront costs. Microfinance
schemes for energy access, while beneficial, have downsides. Loan repayments can
burden families, and people might choose the cheapest, potentially unreliable
technology. The poorest households may also be excluded. Microfinance schemes,
if not well-designed, may inadvertently reinforce existing gender inequalities
by disproportionately targeting male borrowers or neglecting the specific needs
and priorities of female entrepreneurs and households. To overcome these
challenges, microfinance needs to be implemented thoughtfully to ensure
affordability and effectiveness. Tiered pricing structures and financial
inclusion mechanisms can be instrumental in making energy services economically
viable for a greater number of people. By tailoring pricing to income levels and
providing financial mechanisms for access, the affordability gap can be
mitigated so that energy services are within better reach for low-income
populations. Furthermore, it is imperative to acknowledge that energy needs
extend beyond the household level. Communities of farmers, entrepreneurs, and
various other groups may possess specific requirements that necessitate tailored
financial programs. Moreover, local communities are increasingly assuming a
proactive role rather than merely being passive end-users. Many communities take
the lead in devising their own energy access solutions, requiring a different
form of support and financial solutions to empower their self-sufficiency and
resilience. The acknowledgment of this diversity in energy access needs and
community-driven initiatives is paramount in achieving an equitable and all-
encompassing approach to energy access. Above these, all of the financial
mechanisms typically require considerable investments and recurring costs for
the state budget. Combining fiscal sustainability, environmental sustainability,
and widening access to energy is very challenging for many developing countries,
which might therefore require extensive external assistance. Therefore,
innovative partnerships forged among governments, financial institutions, the
private sector and development agencies serve as instrumental conduits for
mobilizing resources and expertise. These partnerships play a pivotal role in
supporting the expansion of energy access and scaling up clean energy projects,
particularly in regions with limited access to capital. Specifically, public-
private partnerships can make upfront costs more manageable. Moreover, public
and private investments in renewable energy sources can not only reduce long-
term operational costs but also contribute to environmental sustainability. For
instance, Rwanda has set up a Renewable Energy Project Fund, aiming to promote
private sector-led, off-grid renewable energy development, by providing lines of
credit and creating an enabling environment for off-grid electrification. The
project was implemented by the Government of Rwanda through the Development Bank
of Rwanda, with management support from the World Bank and financing from the
Climate Investment Funds’ (CIF) Scaling Up Renewable Energy Program (SREP). Box
1: Results-Based Financing Models Results-based financing (RBF) models are
increasingly gaining traction as a mechanism to incentivize energy service
providers to reach underserved populations. These models tie financial
incentives to the achievement of defined energy access goals. In essence, they
reward the successful expansion of energy services to those who need it most.
RBF has proven to be an effective strategy in catalyzing the expansion of energy
access and accelerating the transition to cleaner and more sustainable energy
sources. Results-Based Financing is a strategic approach that shifts the focus
from merely funding projects and initiatives to achieving defined outcomes. It
operates on the principle of paying for results achieved and performance against
pre-established targets (see Figure 5). This results-oriented approach is
particularly valuable in energy projects because it provides a direct link
between funding and the impact on beneficiaries. Figure 5: Results-based
financing mechanism (OECD, 2014) One of the core principles of RBF is
incentivizing energy service providers to reach underserved populations and
attain energy access goals. These incentives can be financial rewards, grants,
or subsidies, often tied to specific performance indicators. For instance,
energy providers may receive payments upon successfully connecting a certain
number of households to the grid or installing a specific capacity of renewable
energy infrastructure. Nevertheless, it is often suggested to select targets
closer to outcomes than to outputs, to reduce the risk of disincentivizing
and/or neglecting key dimensions of a program. RBF models have the potential to
significantly scale up energy access projects, particularly in underserved
regions. By linking payments to results, governments and development
organizations motivate energy providers to expand their operations in areas that
are traditionally considered financially unattractive, such as remote rural
communities. Project implementers are required to demonstrate the achievement of
specific milestones or targets. This not only ensures that funds are used
effectively but also enhances the trust and credibility of energy access
projects, which can be especially crucial in attracting additional investments.
While RBF models offer numerous advantages, they are not without challenges.
Setting realistic and measurable targets can be complex, and verification
processes must be rigorous. Moreover, RBF models require strong governance and
financial systems to manage the disbursement of incentives effectively. This
reliance means that these models may be least applicable to the countries and
populations that need them the most, perpetuating a cycle of exclusion for those
in dire need of support. 4)     Policy Frameworks Effective policies extend
beyond the mere expansion of energy grids and the establishment of off-grid
installations. They also serve as the regulatory framework for energy markets,
guaranteeing that these markets operate in a manner that best serves the needs
of communities and individuals. Incentives and subsidies play a pivotal role in
promoting investments in renewable energy and energy-efficient technologies.
Further, central to policy-driven solutions lies the core concept of
democratizing energy decisions and embracing energy as a collective social
endeavor. These concepts empower local communities, enabling them to actively
participate in shaping their energy destinies. Community-based approaches are
instrumental in promoting self-sufficiency and resilience, aligning with the
overarching principle of prioritizing social well-being as the driving force
behind energy policy. Overall, the efficacy of government policies in promoting
energy access hinges on the strategic application of various policy instruments.
Some of these instruments include: Subsidies Subsidies can play a pivotal role
in the endeavor to provide energy access to all, particularly for marginalized
and vulnerable communities. They function as financial mechanisms that lessen
the cost of energy services, making them more affordable for low-income
households. Subsidies are versatile and can be deployed in various forms to
target both the supply and demand sides of the energy equation. For instance,
subsidies might encourage the deployment of renewable energy technologies or
lower the cost of clean cooking solutions for households. One of the primary
benefits of energy subsidies is their immediate and tangible impact on people's
lives. By reducing the direct costs associated with energy consumption,
subsidies alleviate the financial burden on households. This means that families
can allocate their resources more effectively and access an improved quality of
life. Subsidies can be especially vital in addressing the affordability aspect
of energy access and, consequently, the issue of fuel poverty. However, it is
crucial for governments to design and implement subsidy programs judiciously.
Poorly targeted or unregulated subsidy schemes can lead to inefficiencies and,
in some cases, even work against the goals of promoting equitable energy access.
For this reason, effective subsidy policies should be developed and monitored
with care, keeping in mind the unique characteristics and needs of the target
populations. Tax Incentives These incentives, offered by governments, provide
financial benefits or advantages to individuals, businesses, or organizations
engaged in activities that align with energy access and objectives related to
the promotion of sustainable energy. Ideally, they work as a carrot-and-stick
approach, encouraging and rewarding actions that promote these goals while
penalizing activities that hinder them. Tax incentives can be strategically
designed to promote energy access for underserved and marginalized communities.
For example, tax credits or deductions can be extended to businesses or
households that invest in off-grid renewable energy systems, such as solar
panels or small wind turbines. These incentives serve as a financial incentive
to expand access to affordable and reliable energy sources in remote and off-
grid areas, often neglected by traditional energy providers. To transition to a
more sustainable energy landscape, tax incentives are deployed to encourage the
adoption of cleaner and greener technologies. By offering these financial
benefits, governments aim to stimulate the adoption of technologies that reduce
carbon emissions, enhance energy efficiency, and contribute to a more
sustainable energy sector. Tax incentives can attract private investments into
the energy access and sustainable energy sectors. Through mechanisms such as
investment tax credits or accelerated depreciation schedules, governments can
lure investors and companies to engage in projects related to renewable energy
generation, microgrids, or other initiatives that boost energy access and
sustainability. Such incentives lower the financial risks and increase the
return on investment, making these sectors more appealing to investors.
Governments can use tax incentives to bolster research and development (R&D) in
energy access technologies and sustainable energy solutions. Offering tax
credits or deductions to companies investing in R&D can be viewed as a means for
countries to potentially promote innovation and the development of cutting-edge
technologies. This approach has the potential to revolutionize energy access for
remote and underserved regions while pushing the boundaries of sustainable
energy practices. Tax incentives require careful monitoring and evaluation to
ensure they align with policy goals. Governments must ensure that these
incentives are effectively reaching the intended beneficiaries and driving
energy access and sustainability. This necessitates strong governance and
institutions, clear regulations and accountability mechanisms, and reporting
mechanisms to measure the incentives' impact on energy access and sustainable
practices. Regulatory Reforms In the context of expanding energy access and
transitioning to sustainable energy sources, regulatory reforms can be
instrumental in driving change, fostering innovation, and ensuring
accountability. They provide the legal framework, rules, and standards necessary
for governing the production, transmission, distribution, and consumption of
energy. Regulatory reforms can create a conducive environment for the adoption
of sustainable energy practices. They establish targets and mandates for
renewable energy integration, emissions reductions, and energy efficiency
improvements. By requiring energy providers and consumers to adhere to these
standards, regulatory bodies promote the adoption of clean and sustainable
technologies, while reducing the carbon footprint of energy generation and
consumption. Regulatory reforms can incentivize grid expansion and connectivity,
especially in remote or off-grid regions. They may introduce mechanisms for
utilities to invest in grid extension, ensuring that underserved communities
gain access to electricity. These reforms can also promote the development of
microgrids, enhancing energy access in isolated areas and enabling a more
reliable energy supply. It is also possible, through regulatory reforms, to
require energy providers to reduce their environmental impact, promote community
engagement, and ensure that energy projects benefit the local population. This
fosters a sense of accountability and aligns energy projects with broader
sustainable development goals. These policy instruments operate most effectively
when implemented in conjunction. By deploying multifaceted approaches,
governments can foster an energy ecosystem where everyone, regardless of their
economic status, should be able to access reliable, affordable, and sustainable
energy services. Further, beyond electricity access, clean cooking must assume a
position of prominence on the policy agenda and sustaining the political
attention vis-a-vis the issue is critical. Although improving access to clean
cooking is a complex challenge deeply rooted in cultural and social behaviors,
prioritizing integrated solutions that engage the private sector and align with
people's needs and preferences is paramount. Identifying and prioritizing the
needs of cookstove users, especially women, is imperative. Their active
involvement in the design and promotion of clean cooking technologies ensures
that these solutions effectively address their unique requirements, ultimately
contributing to sustainable development. In other words, a bottom-up approach
could prove helpful to smooth context-specific cultural barriers that the
adoption of clean cooking may face. Case Study 5: RBLAC: Energy Safety Nets in
Brazil. Luz para Todos (Light for All), Tarifa Social (Social Tariff) and Bolsa
Familia (Family Allowance) Case Study RBLAC: Energy Safety Nets in Brazil. Luz
para Todos (Light for All), Tarifa Social (Social Tariff) and Bolsa Familia
(Family Allowance) – (Verónica) Focus Region: RBLAC Focus Country: Brazil Main
Discussion Points: --     Use as a case study for Chapter 4 (Strategies for
Overcoming Energy Access Challenges), Section 4.1.3. (Policy-Driven Initiatives)
--   It should work as example of how access policy should encompass various
aspects and dimensions beyond mere service availability.. --    Ensure to
address any comments provided. --     Limit the length to 1 page. --  Emphasize
replicable lessons learned from this experience. --   Give it a more critical
perspective, avoiding overly promotional language. 5)   Collaborative
Partnerships Expanding energy access to underserved and marginalized communities
is a complex and multifaceted challenge that requires the collaboration of
various stakeholders. Multi-stakeholder partnerships bring together a range of
actors from different sectors, each contributing their expertise, resources, and
perspectives to tackle energy access challenges. These partnerships foster
collaboration, synergy, and shared responsibility for achieving energy access
goals. Moreover, policy and governance are closely intertwined. Scholars
commonly attribute the success of an energy transition initiative to the support
of a broad coalition of stakeholders and engagement with local initiatives.
According to Cha et al. (2020), a “just transition” can be achieved through the
implementation of four pivotal governance strategies: robust governmental
backing, dedicated funding mechanisms, the formation of diverse and resilient
coalitions, and the promotion of economic diversification. These coalitions can
be nurtured through collaboration with social movements and community actors,
fostering the development of an alternative vision and uniting a diverse array
of actors who can both support and finance the realization of 'just energy'
initiatives. The importance of multistakeholder partnerships cannot be
overstated for several reasons: --     Resource Mobilization: Energy access
projects often require substantial resources, including financial investments,
technical expertise, and human resources. Multi-stakeholder partnerships bring
together a diverse array of actors, each contributing resources from their
respective domains. Governments can provide funding and policy support, NGOs
might offer on-ground expertise and community outreach, the private sector could
contribute innovative technologies and investments, and international
organizations can offer a global perspective and coordination. --
Comprehensive Solutions: Energy access is a multifaceted challenge with social,
economic, technical, and environmental dimensions. Multistakeholder partnerships
enable a holistic approach to address these complexities. By uniting experts
from various sectors, partnerships can develop and implement comprehensive
solutions that tackle both the technical and social aspects of energy access. --
Capacity Building: Many energy access projects target underserved and
marginalized communities. In this context, NGOs and grassroots organizations
often play a significant role within partnerships. They facilitate capacity-
building initiatives, empowering local communities to participate actively in
project planning, implementation, and maintenance. These initiatives help build
the skills and knowledge necessary for sustainable energy solutions. --
Global Reach: Multistakeholder partnerships often transcend national and
regional boundaries, enabling access to global resources, knowledge, and
technologies. International organizations and development agencies provide a
platform for knowledge exchange, coordination, and resource sharing on a global
scale. This broader reach allows for the cross-pollination of ideas and best
practices, ultimately accelerating progress. --     Risk Sharing and
Collaboration: Energy access projects are often risky and complex endeavors. By
pooling resources and expertise, stakeholders within partnerships share the
risks and collaborate in the pursuit of common objectives, thereby lowering some
of the uncertainty that can stop them from otherwise moving forward.
Collaboration fosters synergy and collective problem-solving, which is
particularly essential when addressing the unique challenges faced in energy
access projects. --      Inclusivity and Local Contextualization: Local
communities are central to the success of energy access projects. Multi-
stakeholder partnerships ensure that the voices of these communities, and the
different groups that constitute them, are heard. They allow for the integration
of local knowledge and contextualization of projects, aligning them with
community needs and preferences. This approach ensures that energy access
solutions are both effective and culturally sensitive. --      Leveraging
Expertise: Each stakeholder brings a unique set of skills and expertise to the
table. Partnerships facilitate the sharing of this expertise, fostering
innovation and efficiency. The private sector's innovative technologies,
governments' regulatory and policy authority, and NGOs' community engagement
experience, when combined, can create a potent drive for change. While multi-
stakeholder partnerships offer significant advantages, they are not without
their challenges. Conflicts of interest, varying priorities, and issues related
to coordination and resource allocation may arise. Common challenges include: --
Differing Agendas and Priorities: Stakeholders often join partnerships with
distinct objectives and priorities. For example, governments may prioritize
energy access as a means to foster economic development, while NGOs may
prioritize social and environmental sustainability and community engagement.
These differing agendas can lead to conflicts within the partnership. The key to
addressing this challenge is to foster open and transparent communication from
the outset. Partners must clearly define their objectives and find common
ground. Setting clear and shared goals, and aligning the partnership's mission
with the overarching objective of expanding energy access, can help bridge these
differences. --  Resource Allocation and Financial Constraints: Resource
allocation can be a contentious issue in multistakeholder partnerships.
Differing financial capacities among partners can lead to disputes about how
financial resources are distributed. Additionally, securing adequate funding for
energy access projects can be challenging. Effective financial management and
transparent accounting systems are essential for addressing this challenge.
Partners should collectively agree on budget allocation, and contributions
should be clearly outlined. Seek external funding sources, such as international
development agencies or impact investors, to overcome financial constraints. --
Coordination and Accountability: Multistakeholder partnerships involve multiple
actors with varying roles and responsibilities. Ensuring that these roles are
clearly defined and that partners are held accountable for their commitments can
be challenging. Establishing clear governance structures within the partnership
and creating a steering committee or executive team responsible for decision-
making and accountability can be beneficial. Regular meetings and reporting
mechanisms can help ensure that all partners are fulfilling their commitments.
--       Local Engagement and Community Empowerment: Partnerships must actively
engage local communities in energy access projects. Ensuring that projects are
designed to meet the needs and preferences of local populations while empowering
them to take ownership of the solutions can be complex. Incorporating community
representatives and local experts within the partnership and involving the
community at every stage of a project, from design to implementation, can help
ensure that projects are tailored to the local context and that communities take
ownership of the solutions. --        Regulatory and Policy Challenges: In some
cases, regulatory and policy differences among partner countries can present
considerable challenges. Partnerships may need to navigate complex legal
frameworks and bureaucratic hurdles. Partnering with government entities and
regulatory bodies to advocate for favorable policies that support energy access
initiatives and promoting collaborative policy development can help streamline
regulatory processes and create a more conducive environment for energy
projects. --        Sustainability and Long-Term Commitment: Energy access
projects are not short-term endeavors. Ensuring the long-term sustainability of
these projects can be challenging, especially when partners may have different
levels of commitment. Developing a comprehensive project plan that includes
long-term sustainability measures can assist in overcoming this challenge.
Partners should agree on exit strategies and ensure that local capacity is built
to maintain and operate energy infrastructure once the partnership concludes. --
Communication Barriers: Effective communication is the foundation of successful
partnerships. Language barriers, literacy levels, cultural differences, varying
communication styles, and geographical distances can all pose challenges.
Investing in effective communication tools and practices, conducting regular
virtual or in-person meetings, the use of translation services, and the creation
of a shared platform for information sharing can bridge communication gaps.
Multistakeholder partnerships can overcome these challenges by embracing a
spirit of collaboration, focusing on shared goals, and maintaining a strong
commitment to expanding energy access. By addressing these challenges,
partnerships can harness the collective strengths of their members and drive
positive change in energy access projects worldwide. Promoting Community-led
Initiatives Local communities and grassroots organizations are integral
stakeholders in efforts to expand energy access, as being, in theory at least,
the primary beneficiaries and directly affected by these projects. Recognizing
their importance and involving them in decision-making processes is essential
for the success and sustainability of initiatives aimed at providing energy
services to underserved areas. Local communities are the end-users of energy
access solutions. Their daily lives, economic activities, and overall well-being
are directly impacted by the availability and reliability of energy services.
Thus, they are not just passive beneficiaries but active participants who should
be involved in shaping and implementing energy projects. Community-led projects
are initiatives where local communities take the lead in designing,
implementing, and managing energy solutions. These projects are usually based on
a deep understanding of local conditions and the active involvement of community
members. They promote self-sufficiency and ownership of energy services. Local
governments play a crucial role in supporting community-led projects by
providing necessary infrastructure, regulations, and facilitating access to
resources. They can serve as intermediaries between communities and external
organizations, helping to secure funding and technical assistance without
overshadowing the community's role. External organizations, such as non-
governmental organizations and international development agencies, can play a
supporting role by providing technical expertise, funding, and capacity
building. However, they should always work in partnership with local
communities, respecting their autonomy and priorities. Inclusive and informed
consultation with local communities is fundamental. It involves actively
engaging with community members to understand their needs, preferences, and
concerns regarding energy access. Effective consultation creates a sense of
ownership and empowers communities to take an active role in decision-making.
Components of Consultation --  Inclusivity: Consultation should involve all
community members, ensuring the voices of marginalized groups, such as women and
vulnerable populations, are heard and acted upon. --      Transparency:
Information about the project, its objectives, and potential benefits should be
shared and communicated clearly. --       Active and Informed Participation:
Communities should have access to information in a format that is easily
accessible to them prior to the engagement; they also require opportunities to
express their views, ask questions, and provide input. --    Feedback
Mechanisms: Establish feedback mechanisms that allow communities to continuously
engage and share their thoughts throughout the project's lifecycle as well as to
hold decision-makers to account with regards to decisions and policies that
shape the economic fortunes and health of communities. Box 2: Participatory
Diagnosis, Design, Monitoring, and Evaluation in Energy Access Participatory
diagnosis, design, monitoring, and evaluation (PDME) are integral components of
a community-driven approach to building energy access solutions. These processes
empower local communities to actively participate in shaping, implementing, and
assessing energy projects, ensuring that the solutions are tailored to their
needs and preferences. The relevance of PDME in energy access lies in its
ability to enhance project effectiveness, promote sustainability, and empower
communities to take ownership of their energy future. Participatory Diagnosis:
Participatory diagnosis is the process of collaboratively identifying and
understanding the energy needs, existing practices, and challenges within a
specific community. This phase involves active engagement with community members
through workshops, surveys, interviews, and discussions. The key components of
participatory diagnosis in energy access include: -- Needs Assessment:
Understanding the specific energy needs and priorities of the different groups
that make up the community, which may include lighting, cooking, heating, or
powering productive activities or prioritizing electrification of different
social services (health, education, etc.). -- Existing Energy Practices:
Evaluating how the community currently meets its energy needs, whether through
traditional methods or modern energy sources. --      Barriers and Challenges:
Identifying the existing obstacles that hinder access to reliable and clean
energy, such as affordability, infrastructure limitations, or environmental
concerns. --   The added value of participatory diagnosis lies in its ability to
provide a comprehensive understanding of the community's energy landscape. This
knowledge serves as the foundation for designing appropriate and effective
energy solutions. Participatory Design: Participatory design involves working
closely with the community to develop energy solutions that align with their
needs, preferences, and aspirations. It includes co-designing systems,
technologies, and services. The relevance of participatory design is evident in
its ability to create solutions that are culturally and contextually
appropriate, increasing the likelihood of acceptance and long-term use. The key
elements of participatory design in energy access are: --   Technology
Selection: Collaboratively selecting and adapting energy technologies based on
the community's energy needs, available resources, and environmental
considerations. --       Infrastructure Planning: Involving community members in
planning the layout and distribution of energy infrastructure. --       Capacity
Building: Providing training and skill development to enable community members
to actively participate in the design and maintenance of energy systems.
Participatory Monitoring and Evaluation: Participatory monitoring and evaluation
involve ongoing community engagement to assess the progress and impact of energy
projects. These processes include: --        Data Collection: Continuously
gathering data on the project's performance, such as energy access levels, usage
patterns, and user satisfaction. This data needs to be captured in a sex-
disaggregated and age-disaggregated manner, as a minimum, to understand
differences in access and benefits. --  Feedback Loops: Establishing mechanisms
for community members to provide feedback, report issues, and suggest
improvements. --  Impact Assessment: Evaluating the broader social, economic,
and environmental impacts of energy access on the community. The relevance of
participatory monitoring and evaluation is twofold. First, it ensures that
energy solutions remain responsive to the changing needs of the community.
Second, it empowers community members to hold project implementers accountable
and advocate for improvements. By involving community members throughout the
project lifecycle, energy initiatives are more likely to succeed in improving
the quality of life, fostering economic development, and enhancing overall well-
being. Case Study 6: SIDS: Wintua-Lorlow Electrical Cooperative – Vanuatu Case
Study SIDS: Wintua-Lorlow Electrical Cooperative – Vanuatu (Kira) Focus Region:
Pacific SIDS Focus Country: Vanuatu Main Discussion Points: -- Use as a case
study for Chapter 4 (Strategies for Overcoming Energy Access Challenges),
Section 4.2.3. (Participatory Diagnosis, Design, Monitoring, and Evaluation in
Energy Access) --        Highlight the enhanced resilience and affordability
achieved through community ownership of the project. --     Discuss the benefits
for local institutions, such as the reduction in fuel expenditures for the local
school. --        Emphasize replicable lessons learned from this experience. --
Present a critical perspective, avoiding overly promotional language. --
Connect with Vanuatu's Community Resilience Framework and briefly explore the
importance of local knowledge for effective and resilient solutions. --
Provide a brief overview of the context of Pacific SIDS in relation to climate
change and energy access: <a href="https://www.nature.com/articles/s41560-021-
00935-1.pdf">https://www.nature.com/articles/s41560-021-00935-1.pdf</a> Despite
the significant increase in energy access across Small Island Developing States
(SIDS), some islands still experience low electrification rates and high
reliance on non-renewable sources (Figure 1). These challenges are exacerbated
by climate change and natural hazards, <a
href="https://www.nature.com/articles/s41560-021-00935-1.pdf">placing resilience
at the forefront of regional energy policies</a>. However, further innovative
approaches are required to accelerate electrification and the integration of
renewable energy solutions in SIDS. Figure 1 – National and rural
electrification rates in SIDS, 2020/2021 (Source: <a href="https://mc-
cd8320d4-36a1-40ac-83cc-3389-cdn-endpoint.azureedge.net/-
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2024/Mar/IRENA_SIDS_crossroads_energy_acce
ss_2024.pdf?rev=fd170581bb4149ef8b96ab5ad6abf910">IRENA</a>) In response,
Vanuatu is seizing renewable energy to expand access, currently available to
only <a href="https://undp-climate.exposure.co/power-to-the-people">33% of its
population</a>. In September 2020, the communities of Wintua and Lorlow
inaugurated a community-owned solar micro-grid. This local management structure
helps keep electricity costs low by avoiding external operation costs. In
addition, these communities have set up an energy cooperative in partnership
with the Department of Cooperatives to manage the collection of electricity
fees. Access to reliable and sustainable energy is a game-changer for remote
communities. The introduction of the solar micro-grid is estimated to improve
the lives of the 2,814 people living in Wintua and Lorlow. By providing
electricity to essential community services such as schools, health care, police
stations, community halls, market areas and the airport, it facilitates better
educational and health outcomes and enhances local livelihoods. The shift
towards electrical cooking methods has also advanced gender equality, allowing
women to allocate less time to traditional tasks like firewood collection and
more to educational and entrepreneurial pursuits. The initiative is closely
aligned with Vanuatu’s <a href="https://www.nab.vu/sites/default/files/event_att
achments/Day%202%20-%20Resilience%20Framework.pdf">Community Resilience
Framework</a>, which highlights that measures should be grounded in community’s
own strengths and values. The success of local ownership and expertise in the
Wintua-Lorlow Electrical Cooperative demonstrates the effectiveness of such
approaches. Expanding similar projects throughout Vanuatu and other SIDS is
essential to address the regional energy challenges comprehensively. footnote1)
footnote2) Urquiza, A. et al. (2019) ‘Quality as a hidden dimension of energy
poverty in middle-development countries. literature review and case study from
Chile’, <a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2019.109463">Energy and
Buildings</a>, 204, p. 109463. footnote3) Reddy, A. K., Annecke, W., Blok, K.,
Bloom, D., Boardman, B., Eberhard, A., & Ramakrishna, J. (2000). <a href="https:
//stuff.mit.edu/afs/athena.mit.edu/course/other/d-
lab/Readings/energy2.pdf">Energy and social issues</a>. World energy assessment,
39-60. footnote4) Sen, A. (1999). Development as freedom. Oxford: Oxford
University Press. footnote5) UNDP. (2024). 3 Ways Clean Energy is a Game-Changer
for Women. footnote6) Moore, R. (2012). Definitions of fuel poverty:
Implications for policy. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2012.01.057">Energy Policy</a>, 49, 19–26.
footnote7) <a href="https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/9b89065a-ccb4-404c-
a53e-084982768baf/SDG7-Report2023-FullReport.pdf">Tracking SDG7: The energy
progress report 2023</a>. IRENA. footnote8) <a href="https://data.worldbank.org/
indicator/EG.ELC.ACCS.ZS?end=2021&start=1990&view=chart">Access to electricity
(% of population)</a>. World Bank Open Data. footnote9) <a href="https://iea.blo
b.core.windows.net/assets/9b89065a-ccb4-404c-a53e-084982768baf/SDG7-Report2023-
FullReport.pdf">Tracking SDG7: The energy progress report 2023</a>. IRENA.
footnote10) World Health Organization. <a href="https://www.who.int/news-
room/fact-sheets/detail/household-air-pollution-and-health">Household air
pollution</a>. World Health Organization. footnote11) <a
href="https://breathelife2030.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/Household-Air-
Pollution-Pamphlet0818.pdf">Household air pollution pamphlet0818 -
breathelife</a>. footnote12) World Health Organization. <a
href="https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/household-air-pollution-
and-health">Household air pollution</a>. World Health Organization. footnote13)
UNDPClimate. <a href="https://undp-climate.exposure.co/5-things-to-know-about-
clean-
cooking#:~:text=But%20that%20is%20not%20all,they%20go%20to%20gather%20fuel">5
things to know about clean cooking by UNDP climate</a>. Exposure. footnote14)
IEA (2023). World Energy Outlook. footnote15) <a
href="https://www.seforall.org/chilling-prospects-access-to-cooling-
gaps-2023/risk-profiles#1">Cooling access gaps in 2023 by risk profile</a>.
SEforALL. footnote16) <a href="https://www.seforall.org/chilling-prospects-
access-to-cooling-gaps-2023/risk-profiles#1">Cooling access gaps in 2023 by risk
profile</a>. SEforALL. footnote17) <a href="https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/as
sets/9b89065a-ccb4-404c-a53e-084982768baf/SDG7-Report2023-
FullReport.pdf">Tracking SDG7: The energy progress report 2023</a>. IRENA.
footnote18) Kuffer, M., Persello, C., Pfeffer, K., Sliuzas, R., & Rao, V.
(2019). Do we underestimate the global slum population? <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1109/jurse.2019.8809066">2019 Joint Urban Remote
Sensing Event</a> (JURSE). footnote19) <a
href="https://www.argentina.gob.ar/habitat/integracion-socio-
urbana/renabap">RENABAP</a>. Argentina.gob.ar. footnote20) <a href="https://iea.
blob.core.windows.net/assets/9b89065a-ccb4-404c-a53e-084982768baf/SDG7-
Report2023-FullReport.pdf">Tracking SDG7: The energy progress report 2023</a>.
IRENA. footnote21) UNDP. (2024). Energy Access: Access to Electricity.
footnote22) <a href="https://www.irena.org/Digital-Report/World-Energy-
Transitions-Outlook-2023">World energy transitions outlook 2023</a>. IRENA.
footnote23) <a href="https://www.irena.org/Digital-Report/World-Energy-
Transitions-Outlook-2023">World energy transitions outlook 2023</a>. IRENA.
footnote24) <a
href="https://www.irena.org/News/pressreleases/2023/Feb/Investments-in-
Renewables-Reached-Record-High-But-Need-Massive-Increase-More-Equitable-
Distribution">Investments in renewables reached record high, but need massive
increase and more equitable distribution.</a> IRENA. (2023a, February 22).
footnote25) <a href="https://www.irena.org/Publications/2023/Feb/Global-
landscape-of-renewable-energy-finance-2023">Global landscape of renewable energy
finance 2023</a>. IRENA. (2023a, February 1). footnote26) <a
href="https://unctad.org/meeting/launch-world-investment-report-2023">Launch of
the World Investment Report 2023</a>. UNCTAD. (2023, July 5). footnote27) <a
href="https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2024/02/financial-instruments-key-to-
hitting-1-trillion-in-green-investments/">Here’s how development banks are de-
risking Green Investments</a>. World Economic Forum. footnote28) Diop, M., &
Ramahi, M. J. A. (2023, October 25). <a
href="https://fortune.com/2023/10/25/energy-transition-ithreat-global-south-
climate-change-diiop-al-ramahi/">The energy transition is under threat as the
global south lags behind</a>. Fortune Asia. footnote29) <a
href="https://blogs.worldbank.org/en/energy/renewables-are-key-green-secure-
affordable-energy">Renewables are the key to green, secure, affordable
energy</a>. World Bank Blogs. footnote30) World Bank Group. (2023, May 18). <a
href="https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2023/05/16/breaking-down-
barriers-to-clean-energy-transition">Breaking down barriers to clean energy
transition</a>. World Bank. footnote31) Cappa, A., Terranova, L., Brodschi, E.,
Repetto, V., & Gregorini, I. (2021). <a href="https://www.argentina.gob.ar/sites
/default/files/consultoria_para_el_relevamiento_y_estudio_de_gastos_soportables_
vinculados_a_la_regularizacion_dominial_y_formalizacion_de_servicios_publicos_en
_barrios_populares_informe_final_-_junio_2021.pdf">Consultoría para el
relevamiento y estudio de gastos soportables vinculados a la regularización
dominial y formalización de servicios públicos en barrios populares</a>.
Secretaría de Integración Socio Urbana, Ministerio de Desarrollo Social
Argentina. footnote32) Siksnelyte-Butkiene, I., Streimikiene, D., Lekavicius,
V., & Balezentis, T. (2021). Energy poverty indicators: A systematic literature
review and comprehensive analysis of integrity. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2021.102756">Sustainable Cities and
Society</a>, 67, 102756. footnote33) Xu, W., Xie, B., Lou, B., Wang, W., & Wang,
Y. (2022). Assessing the effect of energy poverty on the mental and physical
health in China—evidence from China Family Panel Studies. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.3389/fenrg.2022.944415">Frontiers in Energy
Research</a>, 10. footnote34) Xiao, Y., Wu, H., Wang, G., & Wang, S. (2021). The
relationship between energy poverty and individual development: Exploring the
serial mediating effects of learning behavior and health condition. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18168888">International Journal of
Environmental Research and Public Health, 18(16)</a>, 8888. footnote35) Cong,
S., Nock, D., Qiu, Y. L., & Xing, B. (2022). Unveiling hidden energy poverty
using the energy equity gap. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30146-5">Nature Communications</a>,
13(1). footnote36) <a
href="https://www.manchester.ac.uk/research/impact/sdgs/equality/energy-poverty-
sdg-1/">Transforming European Energy Poverty: Global Challenges manchester
solutions</a>. The University of Manchester. footnote37) <a href="https://sdgs.u
n.org/sites/default/files/2021-06/2021-SDG7%20POLICY%20BRIEFS.pdf">Leveraging
Energy Action for Advancing the Sustainable Development Goals</a>. footnote38)
Stern, D. I. (April, 2017). <a href="https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/me
dia/5a267ab8e5274a75088c42b0/Line_23_-
_Thematic_note_1.EEG.26.05.2017.v1__1_.pdf">Energy and Economic Growth Applied
Research Programme Thematic Note: The Linkages between Electricity Supply and
Economic Growth.</a> footnote39) Jack, K. (n.d.). <a
href="https://blogs.worldbank.org/en/energy/how-much-do-we-know-about-
development-impacts-energy-infrastructure">How much do we know about the
development impacts of energy infrastructure?</a>. World Bank Blogs. footnote40)
World Health Organization (2014) Household air pollution and health. footnote41)
Rokicki, S., Mwesigwa, B., Schmucker, L., & Cohen, J. L. (2019b). Shedding light
on quality of care: A study protocol for a randomized trial evaluating the
impact of the solar suitcase in rural health facilities on maternal and newborn
care quality in Uganda. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1186/s12884-019-2453-x">BMC
Pregnancy and Childbirth, 19(1)</a>. footnote42) Shobande, O. A. (2020). The
effects of energy use on infant mortality rates in Africa. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indic.2019.100015">Environmental and
Sustainability Indicators, 5, 100015</a>. footnote43) <a
href="https://jpia.princeton.edu/news/powering-households-and-empowering-women-
gendered-effects-electrification-sub-saharan-africa">The Trustees of Princeton
University. (n.d.). Powering households and empowering women: The gendered
effects of electrification in sub-Saharan africa | Journal of Public and
International Affairs</a>. Princeton University. footnote44) Srivastav, S.
(2022, April 12). <a href="https://www.theigc.org/blogs/gender-equality/how-
clean-energy-can-empower-women-rural-communities">How clean energy can empower
women in rural communities</a>. International Growth Centre. footnote45) Thuo,
D. N. (2022, January 18). <a
href="https://www.businessdailyafrica.com/bd/opinion-
analysis/columnists/electricity-access-curbs-gender-based-
violence-3685852">Electricity access curbs gender-based violence</a>. Business
Daily. footnote46) Babayomi, O. O., Olubayo, B., Denwigwe, I. H., Somefun, T.
E., Adedoja, O. S., Somefun, C. T., Olukayode, K., & Attah, A. (2023). A review
of renewable off-grid mini-grids in Sub-Saharan africa. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.3389/fenrg.2022.1089025">Frontiers in Energy Research,
10</a>. footnote47) <a href="https://www.irena.org/-
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2020/Jul/IRENA_Pay-as-you-
go_models_2020.pdf">Pay-as-you-go models: Innovation landscape brief</a>.
footnote48) Chaurey, A., Krithika, P. R., Palit, D., Rakesh, S., & Sovacool, B.
K. (2012). New partnerships and business models for facilitating energy access.
<a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2012.03.031">Energy policy, 47,
48-55</a>. footnote49) <a
href="https://www.cif.org/sites/cif_enc/files/knowledge-
documents/cdi_rwanda.pd">Rwanda Renewable Energy Fund Project</a>. footnote50)
Hüls, M., Raats, M., Sebastian, J., Veen, M., & Ward, J. <a href="https://docume
nts1.worldbank.org/curated/en/793121494941318265/pdf/BRI-P148200-PUBLIC-
FINALSEARSFResultsBasedFinancing.pdf">Results-Based Financing: A Promising New
Tool for Energy Access</a>. footnote51) <a href="https://www.oecd.org/dac/peer-
reviews/Results-based-financing-key-take-aways-Final.pdf">Results-based
funding</a>. footnote52) Cha, J. M., Wander, M., & Pastor, M. (2020).
Environmental justice, just transition, and a low-carbon future for California.
<a href="https://heinonline.org/HOL/LandingPage?handle=hein.journals/elrna50&div
=30&id=&page=">Envtl. L. Rep., 50</a>, 10216. endnote1)