Module 7: Sustainable Energy Finance and Investment Overview This module
provides a comprehensive understanding of sustainable energy finance and
investment, exploring various financing mechanisms, motivations for public and
private sector investment in renewable energy, risk assessment, and mitigation
strategies, as well as innovative funding models. The content is designed to be
engaging and interactive, incorporating a mix of instructional methods,
including video lectures, interviews, slides, quizzes, readings, and
discussions. The Module’s target audience includes UNDP Country Offices and
policymakers involved in energy planning and decision-making processes. Learning
Objectives In the module the participants will --     Understand the ecosystem
of sustainable energy finance, including key financial players and regulatory
frameworks, and their role in managing climate and social-environmental risks.
--        Analyze the impact and mechanisms of public and private investments in
sustainable energy to achieve international climate goals and stimulate market
growth in developing countries. --        Identify key financial instruments for
sustainable energy projects and their role in facilitating energy transition and
development. -- Explore how blended finance and innovative funding models can
mobilize private capital for sustainable energy projects in risk-prone areas. --
Learn strategies to overcome market and financial barriers to scale up bankable
energy projects in LDCs and emerging economies for energy access and transition
Table of Contents Overview      1 I.    Introduction - The Sustainable Energy
Financial Architecture and its Key Players        5 A.    Defining green,
sustainable and energy finance  5 B.    Understanding Green Finance     8 C.
Key Components and Importance   10 II.  The Imperative of Sustainable Energy
Financing in Developing Countries  10 A.   The Energy Access Gap   13 B.
Volatile Energy Prices and Security Concerns    14 C.   Financing the Energy
Transition 14 D.   The Investment Gap      14 III. International Investment and
financial flows for energy 15 A.   Evolving Investment Trends      16 B.   The
role of International Financial Institutions (IFIs) in Financing Sustainable
Energy 16 1.   An Overview of International Financial Institutions     16 IV.
Public and Private Sector Investment in Sustainable Energy in developing
countries      19 A.   Private Sector Investment in Sustainable Energy 19 1.
Profit vs. Risk 20 2.   Policy and Regulatory Support   21 3.   Macroeconomic
conditions        22 4.   The reduction in technology costs       22 B.
Barriers of private sector investment in emerging markets       23 C.   Public
Sector Investment in Renewable Energy in Developing Countries    25 1.   The
Motivations for Public Sector Investment    26 a)   Renewable Energy Investments
and International Climate Goals and Commitments    27 b)   Public Investments
and Market Growth    27 2.   Public Sector 'Above the Line' Financing        28
a)   Direct Investment and Funding   29 b)   Regulatory Support and Policy
Frameworks        29 c)   Facilitating the Ground for Collaboration       30 d)
Enhancing Fiscal Space  30 (1)  Reforming Tax Systems   31 (2)  Redirecting
Subsidies   31 (3)  Leveraging Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs)   33 (4)
Accessing International Finance 33 (5)  Improving Public Expenditure Management
33 (6)  Developing Green Bonds  33 (7)  Encouraging Savings and Investment
34 e)   Institutional Guidance  34 f)   Untapped Revenue Potential      34 g)
Risk Mitigation 34 h)   Fostering Innovation and Technology Transfer    34 A.
Public and Private Partnerships (PPPs) and Concessions  36 V.   Financial
Instruments for Sustainable Energy for Development    39 A.   Thematic Bonds
(Public and Corporate)   39 1.   Green Bonds     41 2.   Social Bonds    42 3.
Sustainability Bonds    42 4.   Sustainability-linked Bonds     43 5.
Transition bond 44 B.   Debt Swaps (Debt for Energy, D4E)       44 1.   The
architecture of debt swaps  45 2.   Challenges of debt-for-energy swaps     46
3.   Advantages of debt-for-energy swaps     47 a)   For the debtor country  47
b)   For the creditor country        47 C.   Leveraging Carbon Finance       48
1.   Direct Carbon Pricing Vs. Indirect Carbon Pricing       53 2.   Carbon
markets  54 a)   The Importance of carbon markets        60 b)   Types of Carbon
Markets 60 (1)  Compliance Markets      61 (2)  Voluntary Markets       62 c)
Key Differences and Similarities : Compliance Markets Vs. Voluntary Markets
67 d)   Challenges on the Road  69 e)   Lead Countries on carbon markets.
69 D.   Blended Finance Approaches and Innovative Funding Models        70 1.
Risk and barriers to commercial investment in Blended Finance   71 2.
Principles for deploying blended finance.       72 E. Emerging Technologies and
Digital Financing 74 1. Blockchain Technology   74 2.   Digital Financing
Platforms     76 3.   Challenges and Policy Implications      78 VI.  Energy
Market Development       79 1.   Energy Markets; An Overview     79 2.   Types
of Energy Sources: Renewable vs. Non-Renewable    80 a)   The Rise of Renewable
Energy Sources    80 b)   Economic Viability of Renewable Energy  81 c)
Challenges Facing Renewable Energy Markets      82 d)   Government Incentives
and Support for Renewable Energy  83 3.   Historical Development of Energy
Markets        84 4.   Key Players in the Energy Market: Producers,
Distributors, Regulators   86 B.   The Global Energy Market        87 1.
International Trade in Energy Commodities       87 2.   Energy Security and
Geopolitics on Energy Markets       89 3.   Future Trends in Global Energy
Consumption      90 C.   Challenges and Opportunities in Energy Markets  91 1.
Market Barriers to Energy Innovation    91 2.   Opportunities for Investment in
Energy Markets  93 3.   The Future of Energy Markets: Scenarios and Predictions
93 VII. Scaling Up Pipeline of Bankable Energy Projects 95 A.   Conceptualizing
Pipeline of Bankable Energy Projects    95 1.   Definitions of Pipeline of
Bankable Energy Projects     95 2.   Criteria for Bankability        96 3.   The
Role of Bankability in Attracting Investment for Energy Access and Transition
98 4.   Challenges in Scaling up Energy Projects in developing countries and
Emerging Economies 99 a)   Financial Constraints   99 b)   Regulatory and Policy
Challenges        100 c)  Technical and Infrastructure Deficiencies       101 d)
Socio-Economic Considerations   102 B.  Key Barriers to Creating Pipeline of
Bankable Energy Projects   103 1.  Key Barriers for Developers     103 2.  Key
Barriers for Financiers     104 C.  Strategies for Scaling up the pipeline of
bankable sustainable energy projects  106 1.  Addressing Project Development
Hurdles  106 a)  Comprehensive Project Planning and Assessment   106 b)
Stakeholder Engagement and Community Participation      106 c)  Navigating
Regulatory and Policy Frameworks     107 d)  Leveraging Technical Expertise and
Innovation   107 e)  Securing Financing and Mitigating Financial Risks       107
f)  Adapting to Market Dynamics and Competitiveness 107 2.  Risk Mitigation and
De-Risking Measures 108 a)  Strategic Contract Drafting and Project Delivery
Selection      108 b)  Identifying and Mitigating Technology Risks     108 c)
Developing a Reasonable Schedule and Budget     108 d)  Active Owner Involvement
and Dispute Resolution Mechanisms      109 e)  Understanding Bankability and
Risk Allocation   109 f)  Financial De-risking Instruments        109 (1)
Securitization  110 (2) Multi-lateral/Bi-lateral Funds for Credit Guarantees
110 (3) Insurance Products      111 3.  Leveraging Public-Private Partnerships
(PPPs) and Multilateral Engagements      111 a)  Public-Private Partnerships
111 b)  Multilateral Engagement 112 c)  The Role of International Coalitions and
Agreements     112 4.  Innovative Financing Mechanisms 113 Introduction - The
Sustainable Energy Financial Architecture and its Key Players Defining green,
sustainable and energy finance Green finance and sustainable finance are types
of financial activities that support the transition to a low-carbon, sustainable
economy while addressing global challenges we face today, such as climate change
and emerging environmental and sustainability risks. Green finance involves
financing projects and initiatives that have positive environmental impacts such
as reducing greenhouse gas emissions and promoting renewable energy. On the
other hand, sustainable finance integrates environmental, social, and governance
(ESG) factors into investment decisions to promote long-term economic growth,
social outcomes, and environmental sustainability. Both green finance and
sustainable finance aim to drive positive change by mobilizing capital towards
activities that promote sustainability and reduce negative environmental
impacts. Box 01: Global Investments in Energy Transition Technologies Global
investments in energy transition technologies in 2022 totaled USD 1.3 trillion,
encompassing renewable energy, energy efficiency, electrified transport and
heat, energy storage, hydrogen, and carbon capture and storage (CCS), despite
existing macroeconomic, geopolitical, and supply chain obstacles. Global
investments increased by 19% compared to 2021 and nearly 70% compared to 2019,
pre-COVID-19 pandemic (Figure XX). This trend shows an increasing acknowledgment
of the climate crisis and energy security risks linked to excessive dependence
on fossil fuels. The current level of investment, while record-breaking, falls
short of what is needed to achieve net-zero emissions by mid-century. The annual
investment needs to average $4.8 trillion from 2024 to 2030 to align with a
Paris Agreement-compliant trajectory, indicating a significant gap that needs to
be addressed. Figure 01: Annual global investment in renewable energy, energy
efficiency and other transition-related technologies, 2015-2022 >A screenshot of
a computer Description automatically generated< Source: https://mc-
cd8320d4-36a1-40ac-83cc-3389-cdn-endpoint.azureedge.net/-
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2023/Feb/IRENA_CPI_Global_RE_finance_2023_
Executive_Summary.pdf?rev=0da63c66358a4a21a427c9943aa1a966 Addressing climate
change through finance is crucial because the global economy is heavily
dependent on the use of fossil fuels and other non-renewable resources. This has
led to an increase in greenhouse gas emissions, which are the main cause of
climate change. To achieve a transition to a low-carbon, sustainable economy, it
is necessary to mobilize capital towards activities that promote sustainability
and reduce negative environmental impacts. Green finance and sustainable finance
are important tools for achieving this transition by redirecting investments
towards environmentally friendly projects and integrating ESG factors into
investment decision-making. By incentivizing investments in renewable energy,
energy efficiency, and other sustainable initiatives, green finance and
sustainable finance can help reduce greenhouse gas emissions, mitigate the
negative impacts of climate change, and help us to achieve a sustainable and
resilient global economy that promotes long-term social and environmental well-
being. Understanding Green Finance The key concepts of green finance are
centered around achieving a sustainable and resilient economy that can address
the challenges posed by climate change and promote a transition to a low-carbon
economy. Green finance encourages transparency and long-term thinking of
investments flowing into environmental objectives and includes all sustainable
development criteria identified by the SDGs. The two main goals of green finance
are to “internalize environmental externalities and to reduce risk perceptions.”
Promoting wide-scale green finance practices ensures that finances are directed
towards green investments which are environmentally and socially responsible,
such as ESG investments, socially responsible investments (SRI), and impact
investments. Green finance offers a range of benefits, including environmental
preservation, climate change mitigation, enhanced risk management, market
opportunities, social and governance impact, investor demand, and regulatory
support. By integrating sustainability principles into financial decision-
making, green finance contributes to a more sustainable and resilient economy.
It supports initiatives aimed at reducing carbon emissions, promoting renewable
energy, improving resource efficiency, and conserving biodiversity. By directing
capital towards environmentally friendly projects, green finance helps combat
climate change and protects ecosystems. The key concepts of sustainable finance
revolve around integrating environmental, social, and governance (ESG) factors
into financial decision-making processes in order to place capital into projects
which reinforce sustainable development. Sustainable finance provides a range of
benefits for both financial and non-financial outcomes, many of which are
outlined in the UN Sustainable Development Goals. This includes societal impacts
such as tackling poverty and world hunger, developing sustainable communities
and housing, and achieving gender equality. Similarly, sustainable finance has a
range of economic benefits through incentives such as the provision of education
and decent work opportunities for all, as well as building resilient
infrastructure and promoting inclusive industrialization. Likewise, sustainable
finance offers critical benefits to our planet, as it focuses on climate action
and mitigating climate change, as well as tackling nature and biodiversity loss
through preserving marine life and promoting sustainability throughout all
ecosystems. Box 02: Sectoral Distribution of Investment -Electrified Transport
Takes the Lead: The largest sector for investment in 2023 was electrified
transport, which saw a 36% growth to $634 billion. This sector now surpasses
renewable energy in terms of investment volume, highlighting the rapid adoption
of electric vehicles and the infrastructure needed to support this transition. -
Renewable Energy Sector: Investment in renewable energy, including wind, solar,
and biofuels, grew by 8% to $623 billion. Despite being overtaken by electrified
transport, the renewable sector remains a cornerstone of the energy transition,
with significant investments directed towards expanding capacity and enhancing
technology. -Power Grids: The investment in power grids, critical for enabling
the broader adoption of clean energy, was the third largest at $310 billion.
This investment is essential for integrating renewable energy sources into the
existing infrastructure and ensuring the reliability and efficiency of energy
distribution. Green and sustainable finance refers to the financing of
investments that provide environmental benefits in the broader context of
environmentally sustainable development. It encompasses a range of financial
products and services, including green bonds, loans, asset management, and
insurance products, that support projects and initiatives aimed at environmental
sustainability, such as renewable energy, energy efficiency, pollution
prevention, and conservation efforts. Key Components and Importance 1.
Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) Factors: Sustainable finance
integrates ESG criteria into investment decisions, which includes assessing the
environmental impact, social responsibility, and governance practices of the
entities in which they invest 2. Support for Sustainable Projects: It provides
critical funding for projects that aim to mitigate climate change, enhance
energy efficiency, promote sustainable agriculture, and conserve natural
resources. By directing capital towards these areas, sustainable finance plays a
crucial role in addressing global environmental challenges. 3. Risk Management:
Incorporating ESG factors into financial decision-making helps investors
identify potential risks and opportunities that traditional financial analysis
might overlook. This approach leads to more informed investment decisions and
promotes long-term sustainable growth 4. Market Growth and Jobs: The demand for
sustainable investment options is on the rise, contributing to the growth of
green finance markets and creating new job opportunities in the sector.
Professionals with expertise in sustainable finance are increasingly sought
after, reflecting the field's expanding significance 5. Regulatory and Policy
Support: Governments and regulatory bodies worldwide are implementing policies
and frameworks to encourage the growth of sustainable finance. These initiatives
aim to align financial markets with broader environmental and sustainability
goals, ensuring that finance contributes positively to global efforts to combat
climate change and promote sustainable development. 6. Investor Demand and
Social Responsibility: There is a growing recognition among investors that
sustainable investing can lead to better risk-adjusted returns over the long
term. This shift is driven by a broader societal push towards sustainability,
with investors increasingly looking to contribute positively to environmental
and social outcomes through their investment choices. The Imperative of
Sustainable Energy Financing in Developing Countries The global energy landscape
is undergoing a transformation, driven by the urgent need to address climate
change and ensure sustainable, secure, and affordable energy access for all.
Developing countries stand at the crossroads of this transition, facing unique
challenges that underscore the imperative for a pipeline of renewable energy
projects. In developing countries, the just energy transition involves more than
just decarbonizing economies. It is crucial to evaluate investments from various
development dimensions, including social, gender, governance, finance, climate
mitigation and adaptation, and biodiversity. This comprehensive assessment is
essential to assist decision-makers in making informed choices regarding
different technologies and financial structures. The goal is to scale up finance
and enabling conditions for economic growth, and inequality and poverty
reduction. Box 03: Geographic Distribution of Investment Renewable energy
investments are rising globally, but they remain concentrated in several
countries and regions. China leads East Asia and Pacific investment, which
accounts for two-thirds of global investment in 2022. China is on track to meet
its 14th Five-Year Plan targets thanks to tax exemptions and other policies that
have spurred solar and wind investment. Solar PV investment in Viet Nam grew
219% per year between 2013 and 2020, driven by feed-in tariffs. North America
excluding Mexico attracted the second-largest share of investment in 2022,
driven by the US production tax credit, followed by Europe, where net-zero
commitments and extensive fossil fuel phaseout policies are driving renewables
growth. In the United States, the 2022 Inflation Reduction Act, which includes
new tax credits, USD 30 billion in grants and loans for clean energy generation
and storage, and USD 60 billion for low-carbon component manufacturing, is
expected to attract USD 114 billion in US investment by 2031. The European
Commission's Green Deal Industrial Plan for the Net-Zero Age would provide
investment aid and tax breaks for net-zero product development, manufacturing,
production, and installation in renewables and hydrogen sectors. The plan seeks
EUR 225 billion in loans from the Recovery and Resilience Facility and EUR 20
billion in grants. Areas with 120 developing and emerging markets receive little
investment. These regions' renewable energy investments are dominated by Brazil,
Chile, and India. In 2022, only 15% of global renewables investments went to
more than 50% of the world's population, mostly in developing and emerging
countries. Additionally, renewable energy investments in these regions have been
declining (from 27% in 2017 to 15% in 2022). Average annual investments have
fallen 36% since 2018. Between 2013 and 2020, 0.84% of renewable energy
investments went to “least developed” countries, according to the IPCC. In East
Asia and Pacific, investment per capita rose 51% from USD 70/person in 2015 to
USD 105/person in 2021. China saw the biggest increase, while Japan dropped 45%.
Except for these two countries, the region increased more than 6-fold, led by
Viet Nam and Republic of Korea. Investment per capita in South Asia fell 6%
between 2015 and 2021, but India saw a 34% increase in the same period.
Investment per capita fell 61% from USD 12/person in 2015 to USD 5/person in
2021, excluding India. The largest and fastest-growing gap is between Sub-
Saharan Africa and North America (excluding Mexico) and Europe. North America
(excluding Mexico) and Europe invested 23 times more in renewable energy per
capita than Sub-Saharan Africa in 2015. In 2021, Europe invested 41 times more
per capita than Sub-Saharan Africa (which fell to USD 3 from USD 6 in 2015), and
North America 57 times more. Off-grid renewables investment is mostly in Sub-
Saharan Africa. In 2010-2021, the region attracted USD 2.2 billion—more than 70%
of global off-grid investments. It has one of the lowest electrification rates
in the world, with 568 million people without power in 2020 (IEA, IRENA et al.
2022). East Africa, home to three of the top five off-grid investment recipients
(Kenya, Tanzania, and Rwanda), received 43% of the total. Pay-as-you-go (PAYG)
business models leveraged the mobile money ecosystem to attract investment to
these destinations. In 2010-2021, 78% of off-grid renewables commitments (USD
2.4 billion) were PAYG-funded, with East Africa accounting for USD 917 million.
Southeast Asian off-grid renewable energy investments fell 98% during the
COVID-19 pandemic, making key markets more vulnerable. While most countries in
the region have high or near-universal electricity access, parts of Myanmar and
Cambodia (26% and 15%, respectively in 2020) still lack electricity (World Bank,
2022). The region attracted USD 137 million in off-grid renewable energy
investments in 2018–2019, led by Myanmar, but in 2020–2021, investments dropped
to USD 3 million due to the COVID-19 pandemic and political developments. >A
screenshot of a computer Description automatically generated< The Energy Access
Gap Energy is fundamental to development, enabling investments, innovations, and
the creation of new industries. However, nearly 675 million people worldwide
live without electricity, and approximately 2.3 billion rely on traditional,
polluting fuels for cooking. This gap in energy access hampers economic
development, exacerbates poverty, and contributes to health problems related to
air pollution. Volatile Energy Prices and Security Concerns Recent global
events, including the COVID-19 pandemic and geopolitical tensions, have led to
volatile energy prices and exacerbated energy security concerns. Developing
countries, particularly those that are energy-importing, bear the brunt of these
shocks. They face heightened challenges in managing energy price volatility,
leading to energy rationing and a detrimental impact on economic stability and
growth. Financing the Energy Transition The transition to a green energy economy
requires massive investments in renewable energy and energy efficiency. For
developing countries to achieve net-zero emissions by 2050, investments in the
energy sector need to quadruple to $1 trillion by 2030. However, these countries
often face constrained fiscal spaces and limited access to finance, making the
upfront investments in renewable energy challenging. The Investment Gap Despite
the tripled investments in renewable energy since the Paris Agreement in 2015,
most funds have flowed to developed countries. Developing countries require
about $1.7 trillion annually in renewable energy investments, including for
power grids, transmission lines, and storage, but attracted only about $544
billion in 2022. The disparity in investment highlights the need for increased
support and innovative financing mechanisms to bridge the gap. The need for a
pipeline of renewable energy projects in developing countries is evident.
Addressing the energy access gap, managing volatile energy prices, transitioning
to renewable energy, and mobilizing the necessary financing are pivotal steps
towards ensuring sustainable, secure, and affordable energy for all.
International partnerships and support from financial institutions, such as the
World Bank, play a crucial role in advancing this agenda, paving the way for a
sustainable and equitable energy future. The initiatives and commitments from
global and regional stakeholders underscore the urgency and collective effort
required to transform the energy landscape in developing countries, aligning
with global sustainability goals and climate targets. International Investment
and financial flows for energy The global energy landscape is at a pivotal
juncture, characterized by a significant transformation in investment patterns
and priorities. International energy investment is increasingly driven by the
objectives of sustainability, energy security, and access to energy, reflecting
a collective global response to the challenges of climate change, environmental
degradation, and the need for socio-economic development. This overview explores
the dynamics of international energy investments, highlighting the evolving
trends, the distribution of investments across different energy sectors, and the
implications for global energy markets. Box 04: Clean Energy Supply Chain
Investment in the clean energy supply chain reached a new high of $135 billion
in 2023 and is expected to surge to $259 billion by 2025. This investment is
critical for reducing equipment costs and ensuring the availability of materials
necessary for clean energy technologies. The trends in international energy
investment are reshaping global energy markets, with significant implications
for energy prices, trade flows, and market stability. The growth of renewables
is reducing the dominance of fossil fuels, introducing new dynamics of supply
and demand. Meanwhile, investments in energy efficiency and new technologies are
altering consumption patterns and opening up new markets and opportunities for
innovation. Evolving Investment Trends 1. Shift Towards Renewable Energy:
There's a marked shift in investment towards renewable energy sources, such as
solar, wind, hydro, and biomass. This transition is fueled by the declining cost
of renewable technologies, enhanced regulatory frameworks, and growing consumer
demand for clean energy. Renewable energy investments have consistently outpaced
those in fossil fuels, signaling a strong market preference for clean energy
solutions. For instance, there's a noticeable shift in investments from coal to
natural gas and renewables. Natural gas is often viewed as a 'bridge fuel' in
the transition towards a more sustainable energy mix, due to its lower carbon
intensity compared to coal. However, the ultimate goal remains to increase the
share of renewables in the global energy portfolio. 2. Energy Efficiency
Investments: Investments in energy efficiency across various sectors, including
industrial, transportation, and buildings, have gained momentum. Energy
efficiency improvements represent a cost-effective strategy to reduce energy
consumption and greenhouse gas emissions, with significant potential for
economic savings and environmental benefits. 3. Innovation and Technology
Development: Investment in research and development (R&D) of new energy
technologies, including battery storage, advanced nuclear, and carbon capture
and storage (CCS), is crucial for the energy transition. These technologies are
vital for enhancing the flexibility and resilience of energy systems and
reducing dependency on fossil fuels. The role of International Financial
Institutions (IFIs) in Financing Sustainable Energy An Overview of International
Financial Institutions IFIs are organizations that offer financial assistance
and expert guidance for economic and social development initiatives in
developing nations, aiming to foster international economic collaboration and
stability. An international financial institution usually refers to the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and five multilateral development banks
(MDBs): the World Bank Group, the African Development Bank, the Asian
Development Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, and the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development. The final four of these institutions concentrate
on a specific world region and are commonly referred to as regional development
banks. The IMF and the World Bank are global organizations with a specialized
focus within the UN system but operate independently from it. International
Financial Institutions (IFIs) only accept sovereign countries as owner-members.
They have a diverse membership that includes both borrowing developing countries
and developed donor countries. Regional development banks' membership is not
restricted to countries within the region but includes nations from all over the
world. Each International Financial Institution (IFI) operates with its own
distinct legal and operational autonomy. However, due to the significant overlap
in membership among multiple IFIs, a strong level of collaboration is upheld
between them. The IMF offers temporary financial aid to member countries to
facilitate balance of payments adjustments. Multilateral Development Banks offer
financial support for development projects in developing nations through the
following means: --  Long-term loans with durations of up to 20 years determined
by prevailing market interest rates. Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs)
acquire financial resources for loans by borrowing from international capital
markets and then lending to governments in developing countries. --        Very
long-term loans with maturities ranging from 30 to 40 years, offered at interest
rates significantly lower than market rates. The funding for these comes from
direct contributions made by governments in the donor countries. -- Some MDBs
provide grant financing primarily for technical assistance, advisory services,
or project preparation. International Financial Institutions (IFIs) support
global programs in addition to their main functions of financing and providing
technical assistance at the country level. Their worldwide operations will be
addressed in a subsequent section of the chapter. Other multilateral financial
institutions, which include publicly owned international banks and funds,
provide loans to developing countries separately from IFIs. They typically have
a limited ownership or membership structure and concentrate on specific sectors
or activities. These include the European Investment Bank, the International
Fund for Agricultural Development, and the Islamic Development Bank. The
International Financial Institutions play a crucial role in tackling global
issues, including the Nordic Development Fund, the Nordic Investment Bank, and
the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries Fund for International
Development. Subregional banks created for development purposes are categorized
as multilateral banks instead of IFIs because they are owned by a consortium of
countries, usually borrowers rather than donors. These include the Corporación
Andina de Fomento (Andean Development Corporation), the Caribbean Development
Bank, the Central American Bank for Economic Integration, the East African
Development Bank, and the West African Development Bank. Other global
institutions like the Bank for International Settlements, the Financial
Stability Forum, and the Basel Committee play significant roles in the
international financial system, but do not engage in lending activities. These
entities are not considered International Financial Institutions (IFIs) and are
not addressed in this chapter, which focuses solely on the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) and Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs). The Role of
International Financial Institutions in Sustainable Energy Finance International
Financial Institutions (IFIs) play a crucial role in global economic stability
and development. These institutions aim to support economic development and
reduce poverty by providing financial resources, technical assistance, and
policy advice to member countries. Their contributions to sustainable energy
finance include: --        Capital Provision: IFIs offer crucial financial
support for renewable energy projects in developing nations, attracting
substantial private sector investment through loans, grants, and guarantees. --
Risk Mitigation: IFIs make sustainable energy projects more appealing to private
investors by providing financial products that reduce political, regulatory, and
currency risks, thus aiding in risk mitigation. --    Technical Assistance: IFIs
provide technical assistance to help countries develop policies and frameworks
that promote sustainable energy investment, such as energy efficiency and
renewable energy sources, in addition to financial support. --      Innovation
Support: IFIs facilitate investment in research and development of new energy
technologies to support innovation and transfer advanced solutions to developing
nations. --   Addressing Energy Poverty: A significant focus of IFIs is on
projects that expand access to affordable and clean energy, aiming to reduce
energy poverty and boost economic development. --     Promoting Sustainability:
Through their investments, IFIs are key players in the global effort to achieve
SDG7 and combat climate change. Public and Private Sector Investment in
Sustainable Energy in developing countries Private Sector Investment in
Sustainable Energy The finance industry's growing familiarity and experience
with renewable energy projects have led to more sophisticated financial
instruments and strategies for investing in this sector. This experience helps
in reducing perceived risks and can facilitate the flow of capital into new and
innovative renewable energy projects. The sector's growth prospects attract
institutional investors like pension funds, insurance companies, and sovereign
wealth funds, looking for sustainable investment opportunities that offer long-
term benefits​​. The private sector's role in driving the energy transition is
critical. Investments in renewable energy by private entities highlight the
sector's potential for significant impact. These companies are committing
substantial resources to renewable energy, indicating a strategic shift towards
sustainability and carbon neutrality​​. This shift is not only a response to
global demand for cleaner energy but also a strategic move to capitalize on the
long-term growth potential of the renewable energy market. The private sector's
increasing investment in renewable energy is driven by a confluence of factors,
including technological advancements, policy incentives, and the strategic
imperative to transition to cleaner energy sources. The investment landscape has
seen a significant rise in private equity and venture capital investments in
renewable energy, with an approximately 144% increase to $11.92 billion across
33 deals in the year up to May 2023 compared to the same period in 2021. This
uptrend is indicative of the sector's increasing appeal to private investors
seeking to capitalize on the opportunities presented by the energy transition.
The private sector's investment in renewable energy is driven by a complex
interplay of factors. While profit and risk considerations remain central,
technological advancements, policy support, macroeconomic conditions, and the
evolving experience of the finance industry in managing renewable energy
projects also play crucial roles. As the sector continues to mature, these
factors will likely continue to shape the landscape of private investment in
renewable energy. Profit vs. Risk Investments in renewable energy are
increasingly seen as both profitable and strategic by the private sector.
Companies and financial institutions recognize the economic opportunities in the
savings, new technologies, and products that emerge from the decarbonization
effort. The expectation of a significant allocation of funds towards clean
energy development, potentially reaching up to $20 trillion globally in the
coming years, underscores the private sector's pivotal role in the energy
transition. In 2023, low-emissions power, primarily from renewable sources like
solar, is expected to account for almost 90% of the total investment in
electricity generation. Specifically, solar investments were projected to
surpass $1 billion per day, reaching $380 billion for the year, marking a
significant milestone by edging spending above that in upstream oil for the
first time. These shifts is partly driven by the understanding that no single
government has the financial capacity to accelerate this transition at the
required scale, hence the private sector's engagement is crucial​​. The private
sector's interest in renewable energy investment is partly driven by the
potential for profit in a growing market concerned with sustainability and
carbon reduction. Companies motivated by carbon management and efficiency tend
to invest in lower-cost projects, including renewable energy, due to their
cheaper carbon offsets and local co-benefits. Conversely, companies driven by
values and market competitiveness are willing to invest more in high-cost
projects, like forestry, which offer significant local co-benefits​​. Policy and
Regulatory Support Government policies and incentives play a significant role in
encouraging private investment in renewable energy. Policies aimed at reducing
the risks associated with renewable energy projects and improving their return
on investment can significantly influence private sector decisions. This
includes tax incentives, subsidies for renewable energy projects, and policies
designed to ensure a stable market for renewable energy. For instance,
Initiatives like the US Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) have spurred a wave of
investment by providing incentives for renewable energy and associated
technologies. This policy-driven approach has initiated a global race to offer
attractive investment opportunities in the renewable sector, further catalyzed
by the development of local supply chains in the US and Europe and the expansion
of China's supply chains. Macroeconomic conditions In periods of economic
expansion, companies are more likely to invest in new projects, including
renewable energy, due to higher expected returns. In contrast, during economic
downturns, investment tends to slow as companies become more risk-averse,
focusing on conserving cash rather than expanding operations. Macroeconomic
conditions are a critical factor in the decision-making process for private
sector investments in renewable energy. They not only determine the cost and
availability of capital but also influence the overall risk-return profile of
renewable energy projects. As such, understanding these conditions is essential
for stakeholders in the renewable energy sector to navigate the complexities of
financing and investing in sustainable energy solutions. Low interest rates can
make borrowing cheaper, encouraging private companies to invest in renewable
energy projects, which are capital-intensive and require significant upfront
investment. Conversely, high interest rates can deter investment by increasing
the cost of borrowing. Therefore, central banks' monetary policies, which
determine interest rates, play a crucial role in shaping the investment
landscape for renewable energy. Moreover, inflation can have a dual effect on
renewable energy investment. On one hand, inflation can increase the cost of
materials and labor for renewable energy projects, making them more expensive to
develop. On the other hand, renewable energy can be seen as a hedge against
inflation, especially if traditional energy sources become more expensive due to
rising commodity prices. The reduction in technology costs The reduction in
technology costs has been a pivotal driver for the surge in private sector
investment in renewable energy. This trend is largely attributed to advancements
in technology, economies of scale, and increased competition among
manufacturers, leading to more accessible and affordable renewable energy
solutions. Technological innovations have significantly improved the efficiency
and effectiveness of renewable energy systems. For instance, improvements in
solar photovoltaic (PV) cell efficiency have allowed for greater electricity
generation from the same amount of sunlight, reducing the cost per unit of
electricity produced. The rise in electric vehicle (EV) sales, more than
doubling since 2021 to reach $130 billion in 2023, further underscores the shift
towards electrification and cleaner energy sources. Similarly, advancements in
wind turbine technology, including taller turbines with larger rotor diameters,
have enabled access to higher wind speeds and more consistent generation,
improving the economics of wind energy. As the renewable energy market has
expanded, manufacturers have been able to achieve economies of scale, reducing
the per-unit cost of renewable energy technologies. This is particularly evident
in the solar PV and wind sectors, where large-scale production has led to
significant cost reductions over the past decade. The increased deployment of
renewable energy systems worldwide has not only driven down manufacturing costs
but also reduced installation and operational costs through learning and
experience. The renewable energy sector has seen a significant increase in the
number of manufacturers and service providers, leading to competitive pricing
and further cost reductions. The competition among solar panel and wind turbine
manufacturers, in particular, has driven innovation while pushing down prices,
making renewable energy more competitive with traditional fossil fuel sources.
Therefore, the reduction in technology costs has made renewable energy projects
more financially attractive, offering competitive, and in many cases, lower
electricity prices compared to conventional energy sources. This cost
competitiveness has encouraged private sector investment, as renewable energy
projects increasingly offer strong returns on investment without the need for
substantial subsidies. Barriers of private sector investment in emerging markets
Despite its potential, only a small portion of global capital market investment
is directed towards emerging markets each year. Addressing the bottlenecks that
hinder private investors from targeting sectors and countries in need of
additional investment is crucial for realizing potential and achieving the SDGs.
Here are five primary obstacles that hinder the private sector from investing in
emerging and frontier markets, with the first being the most important: 1.
Returns are considered insufficient given the actual or perceived level of risk.
Private capital providers are obligated to maximize returns and safeguard
capital as part of their fiduciary duty. Although there are various investment
opportunities in emerging and frontier markets that could have a significant
development impact, many transactions fail to meet investor return expectations
in terms of risk. Investors in emerging markets are exposed to specific risks
such as business model risk related to new markets and projects, technical
feasibility, macroeconomic and corporate governance risks, and funding
shortages. Furthermore, the expenses and time required to understand new
markets, capital-intensive projects, and relatively small deals can be
significant, reducing anticipated returns. The challenge is to decrease the
perceived and actual risk levels or to enhance the returns. 2. Markets not
functioning efficiently. Financial markets in emerging and frontier economies
are typically less developed compared to those in developed countries. They
frequently do not have the necessary infrastructure, expertise, substantial
financial resources, and smooth supply-to-demand connection needed for efficient
operation. Bond and equity markets are frequently under-developed and illiquid,
leading to significant uncertainty regarding investors' ability to exit the
investment and recover their funds. Institutional investors typically demand
investment managers to possess a proven track record of favorable returns.
However, numerous local fund managers lack the necessary experience to showcase
their performance due to being new to the industry. Only a few financial
institutions possess the necessary expertise to create tailored financial and
non-financial solutions suitable for high-potential development sectors and
countries. The lack of scalable, standardized, and investable products hinders
the efficient connection of capital supply and demand, as well as access to
capital markets. 3. Knowledge and capability gaps of private investors. Private
capital providers often lack a thorough understanding of emerging and frontier
markets, as well as the sector-specific expertise required to properly evaluate
risk and make well-informed investment choices. This raises the investment
expenses and diminishes the probability of success. Inadequate knowledge of
local business practices during investment structuring and execution, along with
insufficient market data, including historical financial returns, exacerbates
the knowledge gap. Private investors and fund managers may lack familiarity with
the challenges of evaluating the developmental impact of investments. 4.
Restricted directives and motivations to invest in sectors or markets that have
a significant development impact. Private sector investors frequently lack the
specific authorization or the freedom to invest in developing and frontier
economies or in industries with the potential for social, environmental, and
economic influence. The intense competition for capital in global markets across
various regions and industries can hinder investments when there is no clear
guidance. 5. Difficult local and global investment climates. The absence of
robust and transparent local regulatory and legal frameworks in developing and
frontier markets hinders the inflow of private capital. Capital controls, tax
barriers, labor policies, inconsistent tariffs, and visa challenges hinder
investment attractiveness by increasing transaction complexity and impeding
return realization. The limiting factors are exacerbated by risks related to
fluctuating exchange rates and local currencies, insufficient liquidity in local
capital markets, and political instability. Regulatory policies in developed
markets have impacted the ability of their private capital providers to conduct
transactions in emerging and frontier economies. Since 2008, numerous global
banks have decreased their operations in emerging and frontier markets due to
stricter policies increasing the expenses associated with long-term and high-
risk lending. Unintentionally, these policies have led to a lack of capital in
important sectors such as infrastructure, clean energy, and local currency
lending. Public Sector Investment in Renewable Energy in Developing Countries
The mobilization of public sector financing for renewable energy projects in
developing countries is crucial for achieving sustainable development and
climate goals. Governments and public financial institutions can leverage their
resources to mitigate risks, thereby attracting private investments. Public
funds are critical in areas where the private sector perceives higher risks or
lower returns, such as in early-stage technology development or in markets with
less established regulatory frameworks. The impact of public finances on
renewable energy development is profound. Box 05: Just Energy Transition
Partnership in South Africa During the 2021 United Nations Climate Change
Conference (COP26), the governments of South Africa, France, Germany, the United
Kingdom, the United States of America, and the European Union unveiled a long-
term Just Energy Transition Partnership (JETP) to aid South Africa in its
decarbonization initiatives, particularly in transitioning to clean energy. The
JETP's main goals, supported by a financial commitment of USD 8.5 billion over
3-5 years, are to speed up South Africa's electricity sector's move towards
decarbonization, safeguard workers and communities impacted by the shift from
fossil fuels, aid in the necessary reforms to enhance the environment for a fair
transition, and promote technical innovation and investment from both public and
private sectors. The JETP created an International Partners Group (IPG)
consisting of delegates from its member governments to coordinate activities
among its members and with the South African government. The IPG collaborates
with multilateral development banks and development finance institutions, which
play a crucial role in implementing the JETP. The JETP is backed by a
secretariat currently funded and aided by the Climate Investment Fund. The JETP
will create five working groups to utilize technical expertise and experience in
order to assist in achieving its goals. The JETP's comprehensive program and
governance structure offer a robust framework to enhance the coherence and
predictability of international support. The clearly-defined medium priorities
of the JETP can provide a clear signal to the market about South Africa's strong
commitment to energy transition, despite the private sector not being formally
represented in the program. Source:
https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/factsheet/2023/06/05/factsheet-eskom-just-
energy-transition-project-in-afe-south-africa The Motivations for Public Sector
Investment Public sector investment in sustainable energy is driven by a
confluence of environmental, economic, and social motivations. At the heart of
these investments lies the urgent need to combat climate change through the
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. Governments worldwide recognize that
transitioning to renewable energy sources such as solar, wind, and hydroelectric
power is critical for achieving this goal. Furthermore, sustainable energy
investments are seen as a means to enhance national energy security by reducing
dependence on imported fossil fuels, which are subject to volatile prices and
geopolitical tensions. Economic motivations are equally compelling. Investing in
sustainable energy infrastructure stimulates job creation in new and emerging
sectors, fostering economic growth and diversification. Public investments also
serve as a catalyst for private sector participation, drawing in additional
resources and expertise. Social motivations, including improving public health
through reduced air pollution and increasing energy access in underserved
communities, further underpin the public sector's commitment to sustainable
energy. Renewable Energy Investments and International Climate Goals and
Commitments The alignment of public sector investments with international
climate goals and commitments is pivotal. Agreements such as the Paris Agreement
under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) set
ambitious targets for reducing global greenhouse gas emissions. Public sector
investments in renewable energy are critical for countries to meet their
nationally determined contributions (NDCs) to these international commitments.
These investments not only contribute to global efforts to limit temperature
rise but also signal a country's commitment to sustainable development and
international cooperation. Moreover, international climate finance mechanisms,
including the Green Climate Fund and the Climate Investment Funds, support
developing countries in their transition to sustainable energy systems. These
mechanisms rely on public sector contributions from developed nations,
highlighting the interconnectedness of global efforts to finance sustainable
energy and achieve climate goals. Public Investments and Market Growth Public
sector investments have a profound impact on the growth of the renewable energy
market. By providing initial capital, facilitating research and development, and
offering financial incentives such as tax credits and feed-in tariffs, the
public sector reduces the risks associated with investing in new energy
technologies. This, in turn, attracts private investment, driving down costs
through economies of scale and technological advancements. The establishment of
clear regulatory frameworks and policies by governments further stimulates
market growth. Policies that mandate renewable energy usage, coupled with
investments in grid infrastructure to accommodate variable renewable energy
sources, ensure a stable market for sustainable energy products and services.
Additionally, public sector investments in education and workforce training
prepare a skilled labor force to support the expanding renewable energy sector.
Public sector investment in sustainable energy is motivated by a blend of
environmental, economic, and social factors. These investments are crucial for
meeting international climate commitments and stimulating market growth. By
leveraging public funds, setting supportive policies, and fostering
international cooperation, governments can accelerate the transition to a
sustainable energy future, ensuring environmental protection, economic
prosperity, and social equity for future generations. Public Sector 'Above the
Line' Financing By providing direct funding, subsidies, and financial
incentives, the public sector can lower the cost of renewable energy
technologies, making them more competitive with fossil fuels. Additionally,
public investments can stimulate economic growth, create jobs in the clean
energy sector, and lead to the development of local industries. Figure XX: The
flow of public finance for a just and inclusive energy transition >A screenshot
of a computer Description automatically generated< Source: GLOBAL LANDSCAPE of
RENEWABLE ENERGY FINANCE 2023. Direct Investment and Funding Public sector
financing is essential for kick-starting sustainable energy projects, especially
in regions where the initial investment cost is prohibitive, or the market is
too risky for private investors. By injecting funds directly into renewable
energy projects, governments can reduce the perceived risk, making these
ventures more attractive to private capital. This is particularly important in
developing countries, where the need for clean energy is urgent but the capacity
to attract private investment is limited. Regulatory Support and Policy
Frameworks The public sector also plays a pivotal role in creating conducive
regulatory environments for sustainable energy investment. This includes setting
up clear, consistent policies and regulatory frameworks that encourage
investment in renewable energy. Policies such as feed-in tariffs, tax
incentives, and renewable energy targets can significantly enhance the
attractiveness of sustainable energy investments. By providing a stable and
predictable investment landscape, governments can facilitate long-term planning
and investment in renewable energy projects. Facilitating the Ground for
Collaboration Collaboration mechanisms between the public and private sectors,
such as public-private partnerships (PPPs), can enhance the effectiveness of
clean energy financing. These mechanisms allow for sharing the risks and
benefits of renewable energy projects, making them more attractive to private
investors. International cooperation, including support from multilateral
development banks and international financial institutions, is also essential in
providing the necessary capital and expertise. Moreover, the governments can
play a crucial role in partnering with the international cooperation and
development finance institutions to support sustainable energy financing,
especially in low- and middle-income countries. Multilateral development banks
and international financial institutions can provide both financial and
technical assistance to help countries transition to sustainable energy systems.
This support is vital for countries that lack the financial resources or
expertise to develop and implement sustainable energy projects on their own.
Enhancing Fiscal Space Enhancing fiscal space is a critical strategy for
governments, especially in the context of financing sustainable energy projects.
Fiscal space refers to the financial capacity of a government to provide
additional budgetary resources for public spending without jeopardizing its
financial stability and sustainability. In other words, it is the use of
government spending and taxation to influence the economy. Governments typically
use fiscal policy to promote strong and sustainable growth and reduce poverty.
The role and objectives of fiscal policy gained prominence during the recent
global economic crisis, when governments stepped in to support financial
systems, jump-start growth, and mitigate the impact of the crisis on vulnerable
groups. Expanding this space is vital for supporting significant investments in
renewable energy and sustainability initiatives, which are essential for
combating climate change and promoting economic development. By implementing the
following strategies, governments can expand their fiscal space, enabling them
to invest more in sustainable energy projects. These investments are crucial for
meeting climate targets, reducing dependency on fossil fuels, and promoting
sustainable economic development. Reforming Tax Systems Implementing or
reforming tax systems to increase government revenue is a fundamental approach.
This can include introducing or increasing taxes on carbon emissions, luxury
goods, or non-essential services, which not only generate revenue but can also
encourage more environmentally and socially responsible behaviors. Redirecting
Subsidies Redirecting subsidies from fossil fuels to renewable energy sources
can significantly enhance fiscal space. Fossil fuel subsidies are often
substantial, draining considerable resources that could instead support
sustainable energy development. Phasing out these subsidies, while politically
challenging, can free up significant funds for investment in renewable energy
projects and energy efficiency improvements. Reforming fossil fuel subsidies is
critical for redirecting financial flows towards renewable energy. Subsidies for
fossil fuels often dwarf investments in renewables and perpetuate dependence on
carbon-intensive energy sources. Phasing out these subsidies, while protecting
vulnerable populations through targeted support, can free up substantial
resources for investment in clean energy infrastructure and services. Figure XX:
Annual fossil fuel subsidies by region, 2013-2020 >A screenshot of a computer
Description automatically generated< Source: Fossil Fuels Subsidy Tracker
(2022). Leveraging Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) Public-private
partnerships can mobilize additional resources for sustainable energy projects.
By sharing the financial burden and risks associated with large-scale renewable
energy projects, governments can attract private sector investment, thus
expanding their fiscal capacity without compromising their financial stability.
Accessing International Finance Developing countries, in particular, can benefit
from accessing international finance opportunities, such as grants, low-interest
loans, and other financial instruments offered by multilateral development banks
and international financial institutions through governmental canals. These
resources can provide critical support for initiating and scaling up renewable
energy projects. Improving Public Expenditure Management Enhancing the
efficiency of public expenditure management is another avenue through which
governments can create fiscal space. By prioritizing spending, eliminating
wasteful expenditures, and improving the efficiency of public services,
governments can reallocate resources toward sustainable energy and climate
resilience projects. Developing Green Bonds Issuing green bonds is a novel way
for governments to raise funds specifically for environmental and sustainable
projects. These bonds appeal to a growing segment of socially responsible
investors looking to contribute to environmental sustainability. The proceeds
from these bonds can be earmarked for renewable energy projects, energy
efficiency upgrades, and other sustainability initiatives. Encouraging Savings
and Investment Governments can also enhance their fiscal space by adopting
policies that encourage savings and investment within the economy. A higher
savings rate can lead to increased investment in sustainable projects, including
renewable energy, thereby enhancing the overall fiscal capacity. Institutional
Guidance Institutional guidance plays a key role in ensuring the effective
allocation and management of public funds for renewable energy. Establishing
clear policies, regulatory frameworks, and institutions dedicated to renewable
energy can enhance transparency, accountability, and efficiency in public
investments. This includes setting up national energy agencies or funds
specifically designed to finance renewable energy projects. Untapped Revenue
Potential Developing countries have untapped revenue potential that could be
mobilized to finance renewable energy. This includes revenues from carbon
pricing mechanisms, such as carbon taxes or emissions trading systems.
Implementing such mechanisms can generate significant financial resources while
also encouraging the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. Risk Mitigation
Another critical function of the public sector is to mitigate risks associated
with sustainable energy investments. This can be achieved through various
financial instruments and mechanisms, such as loan guarantees, insurance
products, and first-loss protections, which can help to lower the cost of
capital and attract private investments. By sharing or reducing the risk, the
public sector can unlock private sector financing for sustainable energy
projects that might otherwise be deemed too risky. Fostering Innovation and
Technology Transfer The public sector can also drive innovation in sustainable
energy technologies through research and development funding. By investing in
the development of new technologies and facilitating technology transfer,
governments can help reduce the costs of renewable energy technologies and
improve their efficiency and accessibility. Box 06: Government Energy Spending
-- Governments have allocated USD 1.34 trillion for supporting clean energy
investments since 2020. Government expenditure has been a key factor in the
significant increase of clean energy investment since 2020, which surged by
almost 25% from 2021 to 2023, surpassing the growth rate of fossil fuels during
the same timeframe. Approximately USD 130 billion in new government spending to
bolster clean energy investments was announced in the past six months, marking
one of the slowest periods for new allocations since the pandemic. However, this
decrease in speed may be brief, as several more policy packages are under
consideration in the European Union, Australia, Brazil, Canada, and Japan. The
latest expenditures identified focus on enhancing mass and alternative transit
modes, low-carbon electricity generation projects, and low-carbon vehicle sales.
Since 2020, direct incentives for manufacturers to enhance domestic clean energy
manufacturing amount to approximately USD 90 billion. --     Governments have
allocated USD 900 billion to short-term consumer affordability measures in
response to the global energy crisis, in addition to existing support programs
and subsidies. Approximately 30% of the spending allocated for affordability has
been announced within the last six months. Despite recommendations to focus on
households and industries with the greatest need, only 25% of the affordability
measures are directed towards low-income households and the most affected
industries. --     The European Union provides two-thirds of government
affordability support globally and has experienced some of the most significant
rises in electricity and gas prices in 2022. Consumer support spending levels
have risen in emerging and developing economies due to governments compensating
energy companies for operating losses incurred by maintaining stable prices
during the energy crisis. Emerging market and developing economies' governments
have allocated more funds towards consumer affordability measures (USD 140
billion) than clean energy investment support (USD 90 billion) since 2020. --
Emergency measures were crucial in protecting consumers from energy price
increases but put significant strain on government finances due to a peak in
fossil fuel subsidies in 2022. This may jeopardize certain countries' capacity
to manage short-term relief while simultaneously tackling energy security and
affordability by enhancing energy efficiency and investing in clean energy.
Striking this balance is especially challenging in emerging market and
developing economies because of existing financial pressures. The majority of
spending on affordability and clean energy is concentrated in advanced
economies, which account for 93% of total government clean energy investment
support and 85% of consumer affordability support. Source: IEA (2023),
Government Energy Spending Tracker, IEA, Paris
https://www.iea.org/reports/government-energy-spending-tracker-2, Licence: CC BY
4.0 A)  Public and Private Partnerships (PPPs) and Concessions Public Private
Partnerships (PPPs) refer to a range of possible relationships between public
and private actors for the delivery of a common goal. They are commonly
understood to incorporate three key elements. --    Formalized partnership
defining the respective roles and responsibilities of public and private actors.
There is a spectrum of possible contractual arrangements between public and
private entities. These range from relatively short-term service contracts to
long-term joint venture arrangements. --      Risk-sharing among public and
private actors. PPPs offer a range of risk-sharing mechanisms. They recognize
the differing characteristics of public and private actors and seek to optimize
the effectiveness of public service delivery by allocating risks to parties most
suited to address them. -- Financial reward for private parties, in line with
contractual conditions and risk-sharing arrangements. These elements are
captured in the following definition provided by the World Bank: “A long-term
contract between a private party and a government agency, for providing a public
asset or service, in which the private party bears significant risk and
management responsibility” These elements are captured in the following
definition provided by the World Bank: “A long-term contract between a private
party and a government agency, for providing a public asset or service, in which
the private party bears significant risk and management responsibility” In a
broader context, PPPs can be considered as part of the range of policy and
financial instruments available to public authorities to “catalyze” or
“leverage” private finance. The formal characteristics of PPPs are further
valuable to inform effective collaboration between public and private actors.
The role of PPPs in Financing Sustainable Energy The transition from economic
growth to a model of sustainable development characterized by low CO2 emissions
necessitates substantial investments in energy transformation. One of the
foremost challenges pertaining to the advancement of renewable energy potential
lies in securing adequate finance for green energy investments The capital is an
essential foundation for the economy in the process of low-carbon transformation
and low-carbon investments. The public sector lacks the financial resources to
meet the growing demand for energy investment and government spending and
investments have not been sufficient to raise access to renewable (clean) energy
in rural areas. This low-level capital shortage problem may be overcome with
private investments in the renewable energy sector. But the total reliance on
private sector investments may create a private monopolization of the market in
the clean energy sector. Therefore, PPP model is one of the suggested ways to
raise funds for renewable energy project implementation. As a result, the
importance of Public Private Partnership (PPP) investments in achieving energy
efficiency and sustainable development goals is being recognized by nations
around the world that are embracing PPP models. PPP investments are a voluntary
collaborative relationship between various parties, both state and non-state, in
which all parties work together to achieve a common purpose or specific task and
share risks, responsibilities, resources, and benefits. This collaboration and
risk sharing between the public and private investments lead to a boost in the
capital accumulation in the clean energy sector. PPP investments play a crucial
role in facilitating the expansion of renewable energy capacity. This is
primarily due to their ability to provide substantial financial support, foster
collaboration, and promote mutual understanding between the private and public
sectors. For instance, PPP investments cover a wide range of applications. These
investments can also be basic, “short-term management contracts or long-term
contracts, including capital, planning contractions, operation, maintenance, and
divestment”. The achievement of a balanced risk-sharing mechanism, close
monitoring of contract and concessionaire performance, and anticipation of
renegotiations are crucial factors that determine the success of PPP projects.
PPP investments not only increase renewable energy production but also enhance
energy efficiency. Research conducted eight case studies that highlighted that
pro-poor PPP investments are the best way to increase access to renewable
energy, particularly in rural areas, which can be beneficial in meeting national
and programmatic targets. For instance in Spain, PPP investments helped to
reduce economic risk and increased interest in sustainable energy investment.
Furthermore, the use of renewable energy significantly reduces CO2 emissions in
significant ways; as an effect, it improves the quality of the environment.
Therefore, we can assume that PPP investments and renewable energy play indirect
and direct roles in the betterment of the environment. PPP investments in the
energy industry led to an increase in carbon emissions based on energy
consumption. Financial Instruments for Sustainable Energy for Development
Thematic Bonds (Public and Corporate) Labelled bonds — such as green, blue,
social, sustainable, transition and sustainability-linked bonds, which promote
sustainability and better Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG)
performance, are becoming an important part of financial markets and highlight
the key role debt markets can play in funding and inspiring companies to
contribute to sustainability. As an increasing number of investors look to align
their portfolios with sustainability goals globally, it is important to
understand how labelled bonds may help to achieve ESG as well as risk-return
objectives in portfolios. Green, sustainable or sustainability-linked bonds
(SLB) for example can help mitigate climate change risks as well as have the
potential to generate attractive risk-adjusted returns, although the pricing of
late is definitely on the expensive side. Social bonds on the other hand can
finance new and existing projects with positive social outcomes. Hence, labelled
bonds can help align investors’ asset allocations with their ESG and financial
performance objectives. These instruments are not just available within
sustainable and impact strategies, integrated ESG investors use them as well, if
the pricing is attractive. While all labelled bonds aim to promote
sustainability, there are two distinct groups; Use of Proceeds (UoP) and KPI-
linked general purpose bonds: >A screenshot of a computer Description
automatically generated< --     UoP bonds, such as green or social bonds, fund
projects with specific and dedicated environmental and/or social benefits.
Adhering to standards and predetermined UoP categories is key to understanding
their impact. --       KPI-linked bonds, such as sustainability-linked bonds, do
not finance particular green or social projects but rather the general
functioning of an issuer that sets ambitious, realistic and explicit
sustainability targets at the overall company level. The coupon payments are
linked to meeting their sustainability performance targets (SPTs). Green Bonds
Green bonds enable capital raising and investment for new and existing projects
with environmental benefits. Green bonds are Use of Proceeds (UoP) bonds,
devoted to financing new and existing projects or activities with positive
environmental impacts. We believe impactful green bonds should be issued in line
with the Green Bond Principles (GBP) from the International Capital Market
Association (ICMA), a set of voluntary guidelines that promote more transparent,
unified reporting on bonds’ environmental objectives and estimated impact.
Examples of project categories eligible for green bond issuance include
renewable energy, energy efficiency, clean transportation, green buildings,
wastewater management and climate change adaption. Box 08: Green Bond Principles
(GBP) The Green Bond Principles (GBP), updated as at June 2018, are voluntary
process guidelines that recommend transparency and disclosure and promote
integrity in the development of the green bond market by clarifying the approach
for issuance of a green bond. The GBPs are intended for broad use by the market:
they provide issuers with guidance on the key components involved in launching a
credible green bond; aid investors by ensuring availability of information
necessary to evaluate the environmental impact of their green bond investments
and assist underwriters by moving the market towards standard disclosures, which
will facilitate transactions. Social Bonds Social bonds are also Use of Proceeds
(UoP) bonds where the proceeds must finance or refinance social projects or
activities that achieve positive social outcomes and/or address a social issue.
In many cases, social projects are aimed at target populations such as those
living below the poverty line, marginalized communities, migrants, unemployed,
women and/or sexual and gender minorities, people with disabilities, and
displaced persons. Similar to green bonds, issuance of social bonds is oriented
by a set of voluntary guidelines — in this case the Social Bond Principles (SBP)
from ICMA — aimed toward improved disclosure and transparency in the social bond
market. They also arm investors with the information necessary to evaluate the
social impact of their investments. Recently, we have seen a new type of social
bond emerge in the form of COVID-related bonds. These bonds have UoP terms
specifically aimed at mitigating COVID-19 related social issues and are
particularly focused on the populations most impacted. Examples of project
categories eligible for social bonds include food security and sustainable food
systems, socioeconomic advancement, affordable housing, access to essential
services and affordable basic infrastructure. Social projects can include
related and supporting expenditures such as research and development and, in
situations where projects also have environmental benefits, issuers may
determine classification as a social bond based on the primary objective of the
underlying project. Sustainability Bonds Sustainability bonds are issues where
UoP terms finance or refinance a combination of green and social projects or
activities. These bonds can be issued by companies, governments and
municipalities, as well as for assets and projects and should follow the
Sustainability Bond Guidelines from ICMA, which are aligned with both the GBP
and SBP. They can be unsecured, backed by the creditworthiness of the corporate
or government issuer, or secured with collateral on a specific asset. Examples
of project categories eligible for sustainability bonds include those in the
green and social bonds categories. Sustainability-linked Bonds Sustainability-
Linked Bonds (SLBs) are any type of bond instrument for which the financial
and/or structural characteristics can vary depending on whether the issuer
achieves predefined sustainability/ESG objectives. In that sense, issuers are
thereby committing explicitly (including in the bond documentation) to future
improvements in sustainability outcome(s) within a predefined timeline. SLBs are
forward looking, performance based instruments. Those objectives are (i)
measured through predefined Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) and (ii) assessed
against predefined Sustainability Performance Targets (SPTs). The proceeds of
SLBs are intended to be used for general purposes, hence, the use of proceeds is
not a determinant in its categorization. Regardless, in select cases, issuers
may choose to combine the GBP/SBP approach with the SLBP. In the case, progress,
or lack thereof, toward the selected KPIs then results in a decrease or increase
in the instrument’s coupon. These bonds can play a key role in encouraging
companies to make sustainability commitments at the corporate level,
particularly through aligning to the UN SDGs or Paris Agreements. Box 09:
Sustainability-Linked Bond Principles The Sustainability-Linked Bond Principles
are voluntary process guidelines that outline best practices for financial
instruments to incorporate forward looking ESG outcomes and promote integrity in
the development of the Sustainability-Linked Bond market by clarifying the
approach for issuance of a SLB. The SLBP are intended for broad use by the
market: they provide issuers with guidance on the key components involved in
launching a credible and ambitious SLB; aid investors by promoting
accountability of issuers in their sustainability strategy and availability of
information necessary to evaluate their SLB investments; and they assist
underwriters by moving the market towards expected approaches to structuring and
disclosures that will facilitate credible transactions Transition bond
Transition bonds (TB) are bonds that are specifically tailored towards
facilitating brown to green transition in various industries and sectors
-including in energy, transport, mining, and heavy industries. TB's could be
structured either as a use of proceeds bond or (a class of bonds like green,
social and sustainability bonds) where proceeds of bond issuance are solely used
for the purpose of the transition activity or as a sustainability linked bond
(SLB's) -also known as KPI bonds, where the use of proceeds is not strictly ring
fenced but used more generally provided issuers adheres to the well-articulated
KPI's and associated performance targets (upon which issuers benefits of a
potential pay for performance - mostly in the form of a more favorable interest
rate/cost of funding). A capital markets instrument that an energy company can
use to help finance their transition to clean energy by embedding incentives to
meet predetermined sustainability and transition targets. It has been used by
Tauron Polska Energia, a leading Polish electricity producer and distributor, to
raise a PLN 1 billion bond in November 2020 for increased renewable capacity and
grid upgrades. In this case, embedded in the programme was support from the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) for social impact from
the closure of certain coal-powered plants, including certified worker training
in partnership with local education providers. Debt Swaps (Debt for Energy, D4E)
Developed countries have pledged to help sustainable energy finance in
developing countries but have thus far fallen short on their commitments. On the
one hand, many bi- and multilateral donors report challenges in disbursing their
funds due to a failure to identify fundable projects. On the other hand, many
developing countries report difficulties in accessing available resources due to
a lack of capacity and an inability to fulfil specific requirements established
by donors or financing institutions. High external debt burdens further hamper
the efforts of many developing countries to access finances and set their
economies on a low-emission and climate-resilient path. External debt owed to
the private sector, bilaterally to countries or multilaterally to financing
institutions, is particularly high in low- and middle-income countries and
commonly surpasses the sustainability threshold of 18–22% of debt relative to
GDP. This debt overhang is detrimental to economic growth and an obstacle to
ambitious climate change mitigation measures. Debt-for-Energy swaps provide debt
relief while mobilizing new finance for energy transition – a solution that can
avert the climate crisis as well as the debt crisis. While specific designs
vary, all debt swaps share the same underlying mechanism: the public debt of a
developing country is cancelled in exchange for investments in climate-related
projects within the debtor country and counts towards the creditor’s climate
finance commitments. The architecture of debt swaps Swaps can be organized
either directly between a debtor and one or more creditor governments (basic
model) or with the assistance of a third party, typically an NGO (tripartite
model). In the latter scenario, the NGO buys the debt of a financially troubled
country at a price in the secondary market and exchanges the debt title with the
debtor or country for conservation activities. The secondary market price is
determined by the likelihood of complete debt repayment, resulting in a higher
price if full repayment is anticipated. Other factors considered are the amount
of outstanding debt service payments already forgiven by the creditor
government, along with the economic conditions and growth forecasts of the
debtor governments. Once a mutual agreement is established, the debtor
government typically disperses funds gradually, often into a specific account,
following the original repayment plan of the initial debt. These expenses can be
allocated to environmental initiatives or deposited into a national trust fund.
The interest generated from the deposited funds can also be utilized to support
environmental projects, such as providing grants to local non-governmental
organizations. Funds with earmarking increase accountability by being overseen
by a committee made up of government representatives and independent observers
like national or international NGOs. The price of debt titles purchased on the
secondary market is influenced by the credit rating, debt situation, and overall
economic performance of the indebted state. If debt securities are repurchased
through bilateral agreements, there are no regulations or limitations on the
discount rate used to decrease the original debt. Discount rates are determined
through negotiations between the involved governments individually;
historically, rates have typically varied from 0 to 50%. Debt swaps are more
practical when creditor governments are willing to sell titles at a discounted
price, as this creates fiscal space for the debtor. Debt swaps have primarily
focused on bilateral public debt, but they can also be applied to multilateral
public or commercial debt. A donor country can purchase commercial debt on the
secondary market to provide Official Development Assistance (ODA) or climate
finance. Multilateral creditors like the World Bank or the IMF are unable to
directly offer debt relief due to their legal status. However, donor countries
have the ability to use their resources to repay the debts owed to these
institutions. Challenges of debt-for-energy swaps --       If the discount rate
is low or zero, no additional budgetary space is created, thus having no impact
on the overall macroeconomic conditions. --        If the amount of debt being
swapped is minimal, the beneficial effect on the debtor's economic condition is
insignificant and could potentially be surpassed by the expenses associated with
arranging the swap and establishing a trust fund. --       Debtor nations need
adequate funding to contribute to trust funds, and there is a potential for
inflation if debtor governments resort to printing money to fulfill the agreed-
upon amount in their local currency. --  Debt swaps may pose a risk of
displacing more efficient forms of financing. Debt swaps should be used to
complement Official Development Assistance (ODA), rather than replace other
avenues that could offer additional aid. --        Climate-relevant debt swaps
need to vie with other sectors such as health, education, and infrastructure for
a restricted pool of qualifying debt. Advantages of debt-for-energy swaps Debt-
for-climate swaps are commonly referred to as ‘win-win’ agreements because they
benefit both debtor and creditor countries. We identified the following
opportunities and challenges for the involved parties: For the debtor country --
Debt relief and conversion lowers the overall debt burden on the debtor country
and reduces the strain on the national budget. --       Since counterpart
payments for environmental projects are generally made in the local currency,
debtor governments conserve scarce hard currency, which they can then use to
establish foreign exchange reserves. --    Debt relief can strengthen economic
stability, improve the credit rating of a debtor and attract new investments. --
Environmental projects benefit from freed finance that would otherwise have gone
towards the creditor’s budget; this often produces economic and social benefits
at a local level. --   Grants to environmental projects or local NGOs are
typically distributed via a trust fund that is set up according to original
repayment schedules. This long-term regular financing facilitates funding and
thus the debtor’s absorption of climate finance. For the creditor country --
From a financial perspective, the remaining debt claims of creditor countries
increase in value through such swaps. Creditors can recover all or part of their
debt and thus avoid the accumulation of arrears. Debt swaps are particularly
beneficial if portions of the debt are already written off and full repayment is
unlikely. --       Creditors must mobilize a lower amount of additional funding
to meet their international climate commitments and can register the instrument
as the provision of ODA at the same time. Since the nominal value of non-
concessional debt can be registered as ODA, many creditor countries have used
this instrument to boost their ODA numbers. Further- more, creditor countries
can raise their environmental credentials by mobilizing co-financing through
international funding institutions. A debt swap that is carefully designed can
guarantee an adequate use of funds and carries a greater responsibility than
does a single donation. Leveraging Carbon Finance The global energy crisis posed
significant challenges for energy markets and the world economy in 2022.
Governments have responded with measures to shield consumers from price hikes,
adding to fiscal pressures accumulated during the pandemic. In this context, the
political economy of implementing direct carbon pricing policies has become more
complex. On the one hand, the increasing urgency of addressing the climate
crisis, the benefits of diversifying energy supplies, and the need to shore up
government revenues have provided an even stronger rationale for introducing new
and strengthening existing carbon pricing policies. On the other hand, pressure
on governments to consider any measures to reduce prices in the short term has
been working against emissions trading systems (ETSs) and carbon taxes. Direct
carbon pricing policies are touted as an efficient and effective climate
mitigation policy, but their uptake and impact depend on many factors. A carbon
price provides an economic signal, allowing markets (instead of governments) to
determine where emissions can be reduced for the lowest cost. In considering
these policies, governments weigh the political economy implications of the
different options, in particular how they will affect consumers (particularly
through energy prices), how they will affect government revenue, and the urgency
of reducing emissions. Governments also consider the broader policy
landscape—how direct and indirect carbon pricing interact—as well as the
appetite for alternative climate change mitigation policy approaches. Broader
developments including economic growth and trends in energy markets,voter
preferences, and the state of public finances all shape how and whether direct
carbon pricing instruments are considered, adopted, reformed, or perhaps in some
cases repealed. Further, for ETSs, where the carbon price emerges as a function
of the supply and demand for allowances, these broader factors can directly and
indirectly affect prices day by day. Against this backdrop, this report provides
a brief overview of the key trends shaping direct carbon pricing policies over
the past year, before detailing the observed changes in these policies over the
same period. The year 2022 was marked by a global energy crisis that contributed
to high inflation and a cost-of-living crisis in many parts of the world. The
quick economic rebound from the COVID-19 pandemic had already started to drive
up energy demand and prices in 2021. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine greatly
amplified this effect, pushing up fossil fuel prices even farther and to
unprecedented heights. Combined with supply chain disruptions in the aftermath
of the pandemic, the energy crisis drove up global inflation to its highest
level in 30 years, triggering tighter monetary policy in most countries. As a
consequence, global economic growth slowed in 2022 and is expected to decline
even more sharply by 1.7% to 2.9% in 2023, significantly below the historical
average over the past two decades. High levels of inflation, caused by higher
prices not just for energy but also food and housing, have led to a cost-of-
living crisis affecting particularly developing countries and those with low
incomes. As countries suffered from record-high fossil fuel prices, governments
responded by prioritizing relief measures for households and businesses. The
concerns over poverty, especially energy poverty, were felt worldwide. In the
developing world, the energy price spikes threatened to roll back progress on
universal access to electricity, and the International Energy Agency (IEA)
warned that “almost 100 million people may be pushed back into reliance on
firewood for cooking instead of cleaner, healthier solutions.” In response, many
countries provided temporary energy price relief for consumers. Most European
countries have temporarily lowered value-added tax (VAT) on fuels and other
energy taxes, regulated the retail price of fuels, or provided direct assistance
to fuel consumers. Other nations, including Australia, Mexico, and South Africa,
temporarily suspended or reduced federal fuel excise taxes or delayed planned
increases. Some policies were targeted toward those most vulnerable to high
prices; the Republic of Korea, for example, provided vouchers for energy
expenses to around 1.2 million low-income households. The combination of the
economic turmoil in 2022 and the pandemic hangover has left many governments
facing fiscal pressures. Having spent heavily in response to the COVID-19
pandemic (with amounts exceeding 5% or even 10% of gross domestic product (GDP)
in most industrialized and many emerging economies), relief measures to address
the energy crisis have put an additional dent in national budgets over the past
year. According to the IEA, fossil fuel subsidies hit an all-time high in 2022,
rising beyond USD 1 trillion, and doubling compared to their 2021 levels. As a
result, the developing world now faces a record amount of debt, amounting to
nearly USD 100 trillion in early 2023. At the same time tax revenue is declining
in many places due to slow economic growth, and higher interest rates make
servicing the debt more difficult. All this significantly constrains
governments’ room to maneuver. Meanwhile, the urgency of tackling the climate
crisis is as strong as ever. Extreme weather events hit most regions of the
world in 2022. Large-scale flooding covered one-third of Pakistan’s territory;
extreme heat and drought affected parts of Europe, China, and India, breaking
local temperature records by large margins; and the most severe drought on
record hit the horn of Africa, putting 22 million people at risk of starvation.
In terms of international climate policy, the 27th Conference of the Parties of
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP27) made progress
in some areas, but not others. The loss and damage fund, aimed at assisting
vulnerable countries in managing the effects of climate disasters, saw
advancement. Workstreams to operationalize Article 6 of the Paris Agreement also
moved ahead, and delegates at COP28 in the United Arab Emirates will further
address this process. The need for transparency and accountability in goal
setting and reporting by nonstate actors received significant attention through
the report of the High-Level Expert Group on Net Zero Emissions Commitments of
Non-State Entities. However, the summit fell short of expectations by failing to
commit to the phasing out of fossil fuels and making only Domestically, many
nations forged ahead with climate action in 2022. Responding to the ever-
increasing urgency of the climate crisis, but also driven by the rising price of
fossil fuels, many countries around the world set new climate targets or
progressed concrete policies to reduce emissions. Australia updating its
nationally determined contribution (NDC) target and passing legislation on
climate targets, Chile adopting a climate framework law and a net-zero
commitment and policies to achieve it, and India updating its NDC target and
committing to a net-zero target are just some examples. On the whole, 89
countries, representing 86% of global emissions, had adopted net-zero
commitments at the end of 2022, with target dates ranging from 2035 to 2060.
Many countries also adopted substantial market and regulatory incentives for the
accelerated deployment of renewable electricity generation capacity;
electrification of end uses, for example with heat pumps and electric vehicles;
investments in energy efficiency, electricity storage, and grid expansion; and
support for the development of advanced low-carbon technologies such as green
hydrogen. In many European countries ETSs and carbon tax policies remain central
to climate policy, while other countries are focusing on more directly
supporting green industries and jobs. For example, the Inflation Reduction Act
in the United States constituted a hallmark achievement in 2022, including
measures such as the introduction of a methane emissions charge; subsidies for
electric vehicles; and increased tax credits for carbon capture, utilization,
and storage. Yet, overall, countries are still not on track to meet the goals of
the Paris Agreement. Despite encouraging signs, the overall ambition of climate
policies still falls severely short of what is required. The latest UNEP
emissions gap report makes clear that without imminent large-scale
transformation of the global economy, the collective goal of limiting global
temperature increase to 1.5C will be out of reach. Countries’ new and updated
NDCs are, if implemented, projected to result in global warming of 2.4C–2.6C. To
get on track toward 1.5C (without significant overshoot), the world must cut
current emissions by 45% until 2030. The solutions to achieve the necessary
transformation are well known and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change’s Sixth Assessment Report concludes that there is sufficient finance in
the global system to close the respective investment gaps, but more action is
needed. In this context, the political economy of direct carbon pricing is
becoming more complex. The steep rise in consumer prices, and in particular
energy bills, turned up the pressure on policymakers to consider all options to
reduce cost burdens in the short term—including in some cases calls for changes
to carbon taxes and ETSs. At the same time, the International Monetary Fund and
others argued that the energy crisis underlined the importance of promoting
energy independence and achieving energy security and that adequate carbon
pricing can support these goals by incentivizing the deployment of domestic
renewables and energy-saving measures. Targeted revenue recycling and incentives
for low-carbon investment have been used to improve access to low-carbon
alternatives, promote development projects, and reduce the cost of living for
the poor. Various studies have suggested that direct carbon pricing can support
economic development objectives and does not necessarily reduce economic growth
or employment. The need to develop cost-efficient strategies for NDC
implementation and the demonstrated effectiveness of carbon pricing at reducing
emissions increase momentum for direct carbon pricing and make it a central
element for many countries’ plans to deliver on the Paris goals. Direct Carbon
Pricing Vs. Indirect Carbon Pricing Aspect Direct Carbon Pricing Indirect Carbon
Pricing Mechanism Emissions Trading Systems (ETS) and Carbon Taxes Fuel Excise
Taxes, Fossil Fuel Subsidies, Differentiated VAT Rates Objective Directly put a
price on carbon emissions through market-based instruments or taxes Indirectly
influence the cost of carbon through policies affecting fuel and product prices
Examples EU ETS, California/Québec ETSs for ETS; Ireland, Luxemburg, the
Netherlands, Norway, and Canada for carbon taxes Varies by country, based on
specific fiscal policies not directly targeted at carbon emissions Impact/Trend
ETS prices and carbon tax rates have seen significant increases in some
jurisdictions Affect the economics of high-emission fuels or products
indirectly, influencing carbon pricing strategies Purpose To incentivize
emission reductions directly by making it costlier to emit carbon To modify the
economic landscape indirectly, making low-emission alternatives more competitive
Carbon markets Carbon markets are trading systems where carbon credits are
exchanged through buying and selling. Entities can utilize carbon markets to
offset their greenhouse gas emissions by buying carbon credits from
organizations that decrease or eliminate greenhouse gas emissions. One tradable
carbon credit represents one metric ton of carbon dioxide or an equivalent
quantity of another greenhouse gas that has been reduced, captured, or
prevented. When a credit is utilized to diminish, isolate, or prevent emissions,
it transforms into an offset and loses its tradability. Carbon offset trading
between developed and developing countries is essential for significantly
decreasing global carbon emissions. It helps in raising financial resources,
lowering the expenses of transitioning to a low-carbon economy, and improving
global collaboration to achieve the ambitious goals of the Paris Agreement. This
mechanism aids in the worldwide fight against climate change and encourages
sustainable development and technological innovation in participating nations. .
Carbon markets are evolving rapidly as a new international market nears reality,
with countries such as Chile, Ghana, Jordan, Singapore, and Vanuatu already
establishing advanced digital infrastructures to support their participation.
This development was further bolstered by the approval of Article 6 at the COP26
meeting in Glasgow, which governs the global carbon markets under the Paris
Agreement. This approval paves the way for a market where countries can trade
carbon credits generated by reducing or removing greenhouse gas emissions from
the atmosphere. Carbon markets can mobilize resources and reducing costs,
thereby providing countries and companies with the means to transition to a low-
carbon economy more smoothly. It is estimated that trading in carbon credits
could reduce the cost of implementing Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs)
by more than half, amounting to as much as $250 billion by 2030. This cost-
efficiency is crucial for countries, especially developing ones, as it helps
them manage the financial burden of transitioning away from fossil fuels and
towards green economic solutions​​. Carbon removal vs. carbon avoidance projects
Carbon removal and carbon avoidance projects offering two distinct strategies to
manage global carbon levels. Carbon removal projects aim to actively extract CO2
from the atmosphere, employing both technological methods like Direct Air
Capture (DAC) and natural processes such as reforestation to reduce atmospheric
CO2 and enhance ecosystem resilience. Conversely, carbon avoidance projects
prevent potential emissions through initiatives like renewable energy adoption,
efficient cookstove programs, and waste management practices, thereby mitigating
future greenhouse gas accumulation. These approaches serve complementary roles
in climate action. Carbon removal projects tackle the legacy of past emissions,
aiming to reverse existing atmospheric CO2 levels and contribute to long-term
climate goals. On the other hand, carbon avoidance projects focus on preventing
new emissions, essential for achieving a sustainable, low-carbon future and
ensuring ongoing efforts to combat climate change are effective. Carbon
Avoidance Projects Advantages Disadvantages Preventative Approach: Proactively
reduces emissions through sustainable practices and technologies. Measuring and
Verifying Impact: Complexities in ensuring real, additional, and verifiable
emissions reductions. Economic Diversification and Development: Supports new
industries and technologies, creating jobs and reducing fossil fuel dependence.
Risk of Non-Permanence: Potential reversal of emissions reductions, challenging
long-term impact sustainability. Health and Environmental Benefits: Improves air
quality and reduces reliance on fossil fuels, leading to public health benefits.
Carbon Removal Projects Advantages Disadvantages Direct Removal of GHGs:
Directly removes greenhouse gases, contributing to net atmospheric carbon
reduction. Long-term Commitment and Uncertainty: Requires long-term commitment
and faces uncertainty in removal technologies' viability. Enhanced Biodiversity
and Ecosystem Services: Supports biodiversity, protects water resources, and
provides ecosystem services. Land Use and Competition: Potential land use
conflicts and challenges to food security or local community displacement.
Potential for Sustainable Development: Creates jobs and supports local
industries, promoting sustainable practices. Cost and Investment Risks: High
initial setup and maintenance costs, with investment risks due to uncertain
future carbon prices and policy support. The types of offset projects that are
more likely to be hosted by developed countries often revolve around technology-
driven or advanced agricultural practices, due to the higher levels of
investment, technological infrastructure, and regulatory frameworks present in
these countries. In contrast, nature-based solutions such as reforestation,
afforestation, and blue carbon projects (focused on coastal and marine
ecosystems) can be found in both developed and developing countries. However,
the scale and implementation strategies might vary. For example, developing
countries with larger forested areas and coastal regions might host more forest
conservation and blue carbon projects due to the availability of suitable land
and the critical need for such projects to support local communities and
biodiversity​​. The reasons behind these trends include: --   Developed
countries have more access to financial resources for investment in high-cost
projects, especially those involving advanced technologies. --  The presence of
advanced technological infrastructure and expertise in developed countries
facilitates the implementation of complex projects. --       Developed countries
often have more comprehensive regulatory and policy frameworks that can support
the development and implementation of sophisticated offset projects. --     The
demand for innovative solutions to carbon emissions and sustainable practices in
developed countries drives the development of new projects and technologies in
these regions. The Importance of carbon markets In 2021, the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) released a fresh report card on the world’s
progress towards slowing climate change. The bad news: Greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions are still rising across all major sectors globally, albeit at a slower
pace. Among the good news: renewables are now cheap – cheaper often than coal,
oil, and gas. Despite some progress, the world faces a formidable challenge.
Scientists warn 2°C of warming will be exceeded during the 21st century unless
we achieve deep reductions in GHG emissions now. Effective action will require
concerted and sufficient investment, knowing also that the costs of inaction
will be far higher. Developing countries will need up to US$6 trillion by 2030
to finance not even half of their climate action goals (as listed in their
Nationally Determined Contributions, or NDCs). The latest IPCC report finds all
countries are falling way short, with financial flows three to six times lower
than levels needed by 2030 – and even starker differences in some regions of the
world. So how do we drive – and finance – the transformation needed to address
the climate crisis? Many countries are looking to carbon markets as part of the
answer. Types of Carbon Markets There are broadly two types of carbon markets:
compliance and voluntary. Compliance markets are created as a result of any
national, regional and/or international policy or regulatory requirement.
Voluntary carbon markets – national and international – refer to the issuance,
buying and selling of carbon credits, on a voluntary basis. The current supply
of voluntary carbon credits comes mostly from private entities that develop
carbon projects, or governments that develop programs certified by carbon
standards that generate emission reductions and/or removals. Demand comes from
private individuals that want to compensate for their carbon footprints,
corporations with corporate sustainability targets, and other actors aiming to
trade credits at a higher price to make a profit. Voluntary and compliance
carbon markets are two pivotal components in the global framework for carbon
trading, each playing a distinct role in the effort to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions. Compliance Markets Compliance, or regulatory, carbon markets are
established by mandatory national, regional, or international carbon reduction
regimes. Entities operating within these markets must adhere to regulatory caps
on the total amount of greenhouse gases they can emit. The European Union's
Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) is one of the most prominent examples of a
compliance market. It mandates large emitters within the EU to hold allowances
equal to their CO2 emissions. These allowances can be either allocated for free
or auctioned by the governing body. If entities emit less than their allowance,
they can sell their excess; if they emit more, they must purchase allowances or
face penalties. This "cap-and-trade" principle ensures that the market drives
emissions reductions at the lowest possible cost across the economy. Compliance
markets are designed to achieve specific emission reduction targets set by
regulatory authorities. They are characterized by strict monitoring, reporting,
and verification (MRV) requirements to ensure that emissions are accurately
accounted for and that the integrity of the market is maintained. The goal is to
provide a direct regulatory incentive for major emitters to adopt cleaner
technologies and practices by making emissions a cost of doing business. One
type of compliance market that many people will have heard of are emissions
trading systems (ETS). Operating on a “cap-and-trade” principle, regulated
businesses – or countries, as in the case of the European Union’s ETS – are
issued emission/pollution permits, or allowances by governments (which add up to
a total maximum, or capped, amount). Polluters that exceed their permitted
emissions must buy permits from others with permits available for sale (i.e.,
trade). The European Union launched the world's first international ETS in 2005.
In 2021, China launched the world’s largest ETS, estimated to cover around one-
seventh of global carbon emissions from the burning of fossil-fuels. Many more
national and subnational ETS are now operating or under development. The Clean
Development Mechanism (CDM), adopted under the Kyoto Protocol in 1997, is
another well-known example of an international compliance market. Under the CDM,
emission-reduction projects in developing countries have generated carbon
credits used by industrialized countries to meet part of their emission
reduction targets. Voluntary Markets Voluntary carbon markets, on the other
hand, allow corporations, individuals, and governments to purchase carbon
offsets on a voluntary basis. These offsets represent carbon dioxide emissions
that have been reduced, avoided, or sequestered elsewhere, making it possible
for buyers to compensate for their emissions. The demand in voluntary markets is
primarily driven by entities aiming to meet corporate social responsibility
goals, supply chain requirements, or pre-compliance strategies in anticipation
of future regulations.<a
href="http://applewebdata://4BA25EDB-4875-4C2B-8748-DF38DCE3629C#_ftn2">[2]</a>
Voluntary markets are more flexible than compliance markets, providing
participants with a wider range of project types and locations from which to
source carbon credits. These markets have spawned innovations in project
finance, monitoring, verification, and the development of standards and
methodologies that often influence regulatory market mechanisms. Despite their
flexibility and potential for innovation, voluntary markets face challenges
related to standardization, transparency, and ensuring that offsets represent
real, additional, and permanent emissions reductions. Voluntary carbon
offsetting has emerged as a significant strategy for firms aiming to achieve
their Net Zero goals. This approach allows businesses to compensate for their
greenhouse gas emissions by investing in projects that reduce or remove carbon
dioxide from the atmosphere. While carbon offsetting presents an attractive
option for companies to mitigate their environmental impact, it also comes with
a range of benefits and limitations that merit careful consideration. Benefits
of Voluntary Carbon Offsetting Benefits Description Flexibility in Achieving
Emissions Reductions Allows firms to select from various global projects
aligning with their goals, complementing direct reduction efforts. Cost-
Effectiveness Offers a more affordable solution to reduce emissions, especially
where direct reduction is costly or challenging. Promotion of Sustainable
Development Supports broader goals like improving air/water quality and
enhancing biodiversity, benefiting local communities. Enhanced Corporate Image
Demonstrates commitment to environmental stewardship, improving reputation and
attracting eco-conscious consumers. Innovation and Technology Transfer
Facilitates the advancement of sustainable technologies and innovation through
investment in green projects. Limitations of Voluntary Carbon Offsetting
Limitations Description Risk of Overreliance Firms may prioritize offsetting
over essential direct emissions reductions, delaying transition to low-carbon
operations. Verification and Permanence Issues Challenges in ensuring the actual
carbon savings and their long-term persistence, undermining offset
effectiveness. Inequity and Social Impacts Projects may displace communities or
harm biodiversity, necessitating careful project selection and local engagement.
Market Volatility Fluctuations in offset pricing and demand can affect the cost-
effectiveness and planning for firms. Lack of Regulation Variability in project
quality due to the voluntary market's less regulated nature, posing selection
challenges. Voluntary Carbon Offsets (VCOs) offer a pragmatic mechanism for
entities ranging from individuals to corporations and governments to
counterbalance their carbon footprint, playing a pivotal role in the global
climate change mitigation strategy. These offsets facilitate the channeling of
funds towards projects aimed at reducing, avoiding, or sequestering carbon
emissions—ranging from renewable energy initiatives and reforestation to the
development of innovative carbon capture technologies. Such projects might
otherwise lack feasibility without the financial impetus provided by carbon
offsetting schemes. VCOs present a cost-effective solution for those facing
prohibitive costs or technical barriers in directly reducing emissions. Beyond
carbon mitigation, these projects frequently bolster sustainable development by
fostering job creation, biodiversity conservation, and the enhancement of local
communities' resilience. However, the deployment of VCOs is not devoid of
challenges. The specter of greenwashing looms, with concerns that entities might
leverage offsets more for their reputational benefits than for substantive
environmental impact, underscoring the need for transparent and stringent
project standards. The integrity and long-term efficacy of VCO projects hinge on
their ability to offer verifiable, additional, and permanent carbon reductions.
Moreover, the voluntary carbon market's current regulatory landscape,
characterized by its laxity compared to mandatory markets, introduces
variability in project quality and pricing, necessitating enhanced standards and
transparency to ensure VCOs' credibility and effectiveness. Several factors as
outlined below could hinder their effectiveness in successfully lowering
emissions. Understanding these obstacles is crucial for improving the integrity,
transparency, and impact of VCOs. Challenges Description Lack of Standardization
and Verification No universal standards; verification issues compromise offset
integrity. Overreliance on Offsets Relying on offsets instead of direct emission
reductions can delay essential changes. Greenwashing Misleading use of offsets
for environmental credibility without significant action. Market Volatility and
Pricing Issues Fluctuations in market can deter investment and impact project
feasibility. Social and Environmental Concerns Projects may displace communities
or fail to deliver on environmental benefits. Lack of Transparency and
Accountability Opaque project outcomes and use of funds can undermine
credibility and trust. Inadequate Regulation and Oversight The voluntary
market's lack of regulation can allow low-quality projects to proliferate.
Competing Interests and Priorities Offset projects may conflict with other
environmental or social goals. Despite these hurdles, when meticulously
regulated and strategically implemented to complement direct emission reduction
efforts, VCOs can significantly contribute to the global transition towards a
sustainable and low-carbon economy, underlining their utility in the broader
climate action framework. Key Differences and Similarities : Compliance Markets
Vs. Voluntary Markets Key Differences Aspect Compliance Markets Voluntary
Markets Regulation Governed by mandatory regulations and part of legal
obligations. Operated on a voluntary basis, not mandated by law. Purpose To meet
legally binding emission reduction targets. To offset emissions for reasons such
as corporate social responsibility, brand enhancement, or speculation.
Participants Regulated entities required to participate due to legal
obligations. Corporations, individuals, and governments choosing to participate
voluntarily. Market Drivers Legal compliance and avoidance of penalties.
Corporate sustainability goals, reputational benefits, and pre-compliance
strategies. Standardization and Integrity High standardization with strict
monitoring, reporting, and verification (MRV) requirements. Diverse standards
leading to variations in credit quality; efforts to improve standardization and
integrity are ongoing. Project Types Primarily focused on emissions reductions
within regulated sectors. Broader range including renewable energy, forestry,
and community-based projects. Geographical Scope Often linked to specific
national or regional regulatory frameworks. Global, with projects and
participants from around the world. Impact and Scale Directly contributes to
national or regional emission reduction targets set by regulations. Supports a
wide range of emission reduction projects, often with additional social and
environmental co-benefits. Key Similarities Goal: Both aim to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions and combat climate change. Mechanism: Utilize the trading of
carbon credits to incentivize emissions reductions. Market Dynamics: Prices in
both markets are influenced by supply and demand dynamics, though the drivers
behind these may differ. Challenges on the Road Progress has been made towards
agreeing on the processes and methodologies that countries need to follow to
access the carbon markets. And there are many opportunities – not least the
benefits that will accrue by diverting a share of the proceeds to support the
most vulnerable countries to adapt to climate change. However, there are also
serious concerns including issues related to double-counting of GHG emission
reductions, human rights abuses, and greenwashing (in which companies falsely
market their green credentials, for example, misrepresentations of climate-
neutral products or services). Which is why the Paris Agreement negotiations on
this topic have been so complex and protracted. For carbon markets to be
successful, these issues must be addressed. Emission reductions and removals
must be real and aligned with the country’s NDC. There must be transparency in
the institutional and financial infrastructure for carbon market transactions.
And there must be adequate social and environmental safeguards to mitigate
against any adverse project impacts – and to promote positive ones. Human rights
must also be respected, including those of Indigenous peoples’ and local
communities. Building integrity into carbon markets is key. Lead Countries on
carbon markets. Forest-rich countries such as Costa Rica are looking at how to
strategically engage in carbon markets in the context of delivering their NDCs.
In Southeast Asia, Cambodia has extensive experience with the voluntary carbon
market in the forest sector. In line with its <a
href="https://climatepromise.undp.org/what-we-do/where-we-work/cambodia">updated
NDC</a> and ambitious Long-Term Strategy for Carbon Neutrality, Cambodia,
through the second phase of the Climate Promise, is strategically considering
how the regulated and voluntary international carbon markets can offer
opportunities to mobilize investments in priority sectors such as energy, forest
and land use. Meanwhile, countries such as <a
href="https://www.africa.undp.org/content/rba/en/home/blog/2019/putting-markets-
to-work.html">Ghana</a> are already pioneering the implementation of carbon
market instruments developed through voluntary cooperation among countries under
Article 6.2 of the Paris Agreement. Blended Finance Approaches and Innovative
Funding Models Blended finance is a structure that includes concessional finance
to de-risk and crowd in investment from commercial funders. An example
transaction in energy transition is ENGIE Energía Chile’s $125 million 151 MW
wind farm financing in February 2021, which includes an incentive for the early
closure of coal-fired power plants by establishing a minimum price for the
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions displaced by clean power. These individual
transactions are often catalytic to larger scale mobilization of capital. As an
example, blended finance at scale is being considered under a collaborative
platform, Tri Hita Karana, which calls for a “blended billion for planetary
health” from sustainability conscious investors, businesses, foundations and
family offices. Blended finance involves combining concessional funds from
donors and philanthropic sources with commercial funds from private investors
and development finance institutions (DFIs) to de-risk high-impact projects in
priority areas such as climate, thereby expanding the pool of bankable
activities and crowding-in private investment. Its long-term objective is to
achieve commercial sustainability with concessional support reducing over time.
The crowd-in effect of blended finance is best illustrated by its “leverage”,
defined as the ratio of commercial financing (from DFIs, sponsors and private
financiers) to the amount of concessional funds. Based on IFC’s experience, USD
1 of concessional donor funding has leveraged on average nearly USD 7 of
additional finance, comprising USD 3-4 of IFC own funds and USD 3-4 of
commercial third-party capital from private sponsors and investors. Similarly, a
recent study estimated that co-financing syndicated lending can mobilise about
USD 7 of bank credit for each USD 1 provided by multilateral development banks
(MDBs) (Broccolini et al., 2021). For climate transactions, the ratio tends to
be higher (USD 1 to USD 10), comprising USD 3 of IFC’s own funds and USD 7 of
commercial third-party capital. This is due to relatively large project finance
structures (using senior and mezzanine debt products) and significant deployment
in middle-income countries that are able to crowd-in more commercial finance due
to their generally lower country risk. Governance structures and clear decision-
making processes are also important, to prevent any potential conflict of
interest between the contributors of concessional funds and the implementers of
blended finance or other commercial financiers. Strong governance processes must
be in place to ensure that the principles are consistently applied, including a
separate decision-making body for the allocation of contributors’ scarce
concessional resources. In addition to the standard due diligence process,
blended finance co-investments may require additional review processes and
assessments, with a primary focus on assessing the rationale for blended finance
and the appropriateness of the proposed level of concessional funding in each
investment. Risk and barriers to commercial investment in Blended Finance One of
the key determinants for deciding the most appropriate types of blended finance
will be the underlying risks and barriers to commercial investment that it is
trying to address. Clean energy sector-specific features and barriers to
commercial investment include: --      Political risk: clean energy projects
that are highly site-specific – for example wind, hydro-electric, and solar
plants – can be subject to politically and socially sensitive and complex land
permitting processes. As well as increasing the risk that projects fail to get
approval, this can prolong the development phase of projects and delay
construction and operation, and therefore the point at which investors begin
generating returns. --      Currency risk: exchange rate volatility can create
mismatches between obligations priced in US dollars and revenues denominated in
local currency, a common feature of power purchase agreements for utility-scale
renewable power generation projects in emerging and developing economies (EDEs).
--  Revenue volatility: the rapid growth and relative inexperience of
stakeholders along the clean energy supply chain can result in inaccurate
assessments of, and imbalances between, supply and demand. This can be
compounded by the long-time horizon of clean energy investments. --  Untested
track records of specific technologies, project developers and operators create
both a higher perception of risk and make it more difficult for investors to
undertake robust due diligence on potential investments. --       Counterparty,
off-taker and transmission line delay risk, in the form of weak creditworthiness
of local partners, such as power utilities, as well as due to the dependence of
many clean energy projects on parallel infrastructure investment (for example
the dependence of renewable power generation projects on grid infrastructure
that is completed in time for energy production). --  Reputational risk
surrounding sourcing of raw materials and manufacturing of components for clean
energy infrastructure, as well as overall sustainability of infrastructure, for
example in management and recycling of batteries for storage. Principles for
deploying blended finance. All projects using concessional funds must include a
rigorous assessment of market failures to support the need for temporary
subsidies and evaluate the potential for unlocking development impact. The DFI
Working Group on Blended Finance agreed in 2017 to a set of blended finance
principles designed to guide all DFI operations involving blended finance. These
principles help ensure that projects have a clearly defined economic rationale
for concessional support, use only the minimum concessional funding required to
make a project viable, and have a clear path to graduate from temporary
concessional support to reach commercial viability. >A screenshot of a computer
Description automatically generated< Scaling the mobilization of commercial
capital towards clean energy will require concerted, systematic efforts by
beneficiary governments, donors and the private sector. Having a clear
overarching development, and by extension, climate objective – for example
sustainable energy access and clean industrial development – as per Principle 1,
can help manage commercial investors’ perceptions of risk by giving them
confidence that individual projects and investments are part of a wider,
determined government strategy. Projects, and the way in which they are
financed, also need to be determined in large part by local conditions, in line
with Principle 3 – for example by being tailored to local capital market
conditions – in order to most effectively tap into commercial capital and help
address potential foreign exchange issues most effectively. Establishing strong
partnerships and country-led governance structures that bring together
beneficiary governments, donors and the private sector, in line with Principle
4, can also help to align the incentives of commercial investors with
beneficiary countries’ wider development and climate objectives. Finally, the
complexity of blended finance is often compounded in the case of the clean
energy sector, one feature of which is the presence of untested project
developers, technologies and routes to commercial sustainability; this puts an
additional emphasis on the need for effective monitoring and evaluation of
results, in line with Principle 5. Whilst blended finance can be an effective
mechanism for scaling the mobilization of commercial finance, it is not a
panacea. It cannot alone address long-standing barriers to infrastructure
investment in emerging and developing economies and must come as part of a wider
strategy to address macro-level – for example, sovereign credit risk and other
macroeconomic imbalances, currency instability, and weak local capital markets –
as well as sector-specific barriers to commercial investment. Blended finance
should be deployed in a way that supports the creation of sustainable private
markets and be provided together with support to strengthen and create suitable
regulatory frameworks that can attract commercial finance and private
investments in clean energy projects. Moreover, blended finance may not always
be the solution to scaling up the mobilization of commercial finance and given
the scarcity of development finance and wider development and climate
objectives, its use should be carefully calibrated to maximize its impact. F
https://www.oecd.org/dac/financing-sustainable-development/blended-finance-
principles/principle-3/P3_Guidance_Note.pdf Emerging Technologies and Digital
Financing The advent of emerging technologies, such as blockchain and digital
financing platforms, has opened new avenues for addressing the issue of
financing sustainable energy projects is a pivotal challenge, particularly in
emerging and developing economies, offering innovative solutions to streamline
processes, reduce costs, and enhance transparency in sustainable energy finance.
Blockchain Technology At its core, blockchain technology offers a decentralized,
secure, and transparent way of recording transactions across a network of
computers. This technology ensures that records are immutable, preventing fraud
and unauthorized alterations, which is crucial for building trust in financial
transactions. In the context of sustainable energy finance, blockchain can
facilitate more efficient and transparent funding mechanisms for renewable
energy projects, including enabling peer-to-peer energy trading and smart
contracts that automate transactions based on predefined conditions. Blockchain
technology's application in sustainable energy systems is a rapidly evolving
area that promises to revolutionize how we manage and trade energy. This
technology offers a decentralized, secure, and transparent method for recording
transactions across a network of computers, ensuring that records are immutable.
This characteristic is particularly beneficial for building trust in financial
transactions within the sustainable energy sector. Several studies and
implementations have explored blockchain's potential in energy trading,
emphasizing its capability to reduce latency in energy trading decisions, secure
transactions, and enable peer-to-peer energy trading platforms. For example,
blockchain-based frameworks have been proposed to reduce latency using software-
defined network (SDN) architecture and secure transactions through blockchain's
inherent security features. Moreover, platforms like Ethereum have been utilized
to model local energy markets, demonstrating the feasibility of processing
transactions with hundreds of participants and a high trading frequency. These
platforms also support off-chain energy trading methods and asynchronous
transaction recording mechanisms, offering scalability and adaptability for
renewable energy trading platforms. The integration of blockchain with cloud
technologies has been identified as a solution to some of the biggest threats in
blockchain implementation, such as identity management and cybersecurity. This
integration can enhance the security and scalability of cloud networks,
facilitating the creation of energy trading systems where distributed agents
interact directly in both flat and non-flat trading systems. Blockchain
technology can ensure efficient and transparent energy use and allocation,
directly increasing social welfare. Moreover, blockchain's role in automating
production systems with smart contract implementation is expected to increase
system efficiency and reduce total costs. However, the application of blockchain
in the Energy Internet, which integrates various sustainable energy forms,
presents challenges such as control and management of distributed energy forms.
Blockchain, with its distributed data storage, peer-to-peer transmission,
consensus mechanism, encryption algorithms, and smart contracts, offers
solutions to many challenges hindering the Energy Internet's development. By
applying blockchain's technical advantages to the Energy Internet, issues
related to its construction and marketization can be addressed, facilitating a
new frontier of technological innovation in the energy sector. The current
research and practical applications indicate that blockchain technology has the
potential to significantly impact the sustainable energy finance sector. Yet,
these are still in the early stages, and further development and scaling are
required to fully harness this potential in practical applications. The future
research directions include improving the construction of energy trading
platforms, efficient algorithm implementation, and applying machine learning to
blockchain-based applications. Digital Financing Platforms Digital financing
platforms play a pivotal role in the transition towards sustainable energy by
offering innovative financial solutions that can effectively address the capital
requirements of renewable energy projects. These platforms leverage internet and
mobile technologies to provide accessible financial services and products,
enabling the aggregation of small-scale investments from a broad base of
individuals and institutions. This not only democratizes access to investment
opportunities in renewable energy but also channels much-needed capital into the
sector, particularly in regions where traditional banking and financial services
are scarce or entirely absent. Research has shown that financial development,
including digital finance, is a significant determinant of renewable energy
consumption (REC). Financial development facilitates funding for research and
development activities in the renewable energy field, encouraging innovation and
the discovery of new renewable energy sources, thereby increasing REC. It also
reduces the investment costs of renewable energy projects, making debt and
equity funding more accessible and at lower costs. Furthermore, financial
development is positively correlated with the volume of renewable energy
investments, boosting the demand for renewable energy. The development of
digital finance is becoming an indispensable part of the financial system,
driven by emerging technologies such as Big Data and artificial intelligence,
affecting household consumption and investment in renewable energy positively.
Digital financing platforms, through their capacity to mobilize resources and
lower barriers to entry for investors, are crucial in the global shift towards
sustainable energy. They not only facilitate the transition from fossil fuels to
renewable energy but also play an essential role in allocating capital to the
renewable energy sector, further promoting the construction of renewable
infrastructures and increasing renewable energy consumption. These platforms
leverage the internet and mobile technology to provide access to financial
services and products. In sustainable energy finance, digital financing
platforms can mobilize resources by aggregating small-scale investments from a
broad base of individuals and institutions. This approach can lower the barriers
to entry for investors and funnel much-needed capital into renewable energy
projects, especially in regions where traditional banking and financial services
are limited or inaccessible. The integration of blockchain and digital financing
platforms into sustainable energy finance holds significant promise for
transforming the sector. These technologies can address several critical issues:
1. Enhancing Transparency: Blockchain's inherent transparency allows for
tracking the flow of funds and energy in real-time, building confidence among
investors and stakeholders in the integrity of sustainable energy projects. 2.
Reducing Transaction Costs: By automating transactions and reducing the need for
intermediaries, both blockchain and digital financing platforms can
significantly lower transaction costs, making renewable energy projects more
financially viable. 3. Expanding Access to Finance: Digital financing platforms
can democratize access to investment opportunities in renewable energy, allowing
individuals and small investors to contribute to sustainable energy projects. 4.
Supporting Energy Trading: Blockchain enables peer-to-peer energy trading,
allowing consumers with renewable energy sources to sell excess energy directly
to others, optimizing energy distribution and utilization. Challenges and Policy
Implications Despite their potential, the widespread adoption of blockchain and
digital financing platforms in sustainable energy finance faces challenges.
Regulatory uncertainties, technological complexities, and the need for robust
cybersecurity measures are among the hurdles that need addressing. Moreover,
there's a critical need for supportive policies and international cooperation to
create conducive environments for these technologies to thrive and contribute
effectively to sustainable energy financing. For these technologies to fulfill
their potential, there is a need for targeted policy support and international
cooperation. Investments must be directed towards regions and countries with
untapped potential but face challenges in attracting investment. Public funds,
in particular, need to be focused on supporting the development of energy
transition infrastructure and enabling policy frameworks that can drive
investment while addressing persistent socio-economic gaps. Policymakers and
stakeholders must work together to develop frameworks that encourage innovation
while ensuring financial stability and protecting investors. Investments in
infrastructure, education, and capacity building are essential to harness the
full potential of these technologies for sustainable energy finance. Energy
Market Development Energy Markets; An Overview Energy markets refer to market
processes specifically with the trade and supply of the energy, which may be a
particular energy sources market such as natural gas and oil, trading of
commodities such as electricity, heat and fuel and market on energy technologies
such as solar photovoltaics (PVs) and wind power tribunes. Energy markets are
known as dynamic, fast-growing and complicated considering their role in global
economies, geopolitics and supply chain. Energy markets have experienced
significant transformation over time that shifting patterns in energy intensity
of production and consumption, energy mix, technological progress and market
turmoil. This is intricately linked to the global economy, as energy fuels
economic activities, driving growth and development across countries, industries
and sectors. Access to reliable, affordable and clean energy is crucial to
fostering long-term economic growth while contributing to market development not
only through energy markets’ itself but also through diverse sectors towards
sustainable development from transportation to food sector, and to industrial
sectors. Energy markets reflect the dynamics between supply and demand, energy
prices, investments and resource use. Price fluctuations in energy prices can
have an implication on inflation, food prices, transport, and overall economic
instability. Transitioning from fossil fuels to sustainable energy sources has
been altering these dynamics by reducing dependence on fossil fuels. This shifts
the energy supply and demand for fossil fuel reserves which import-dependent
countries seek to secure reliable energy supplies to meet domestic demand and
resource rich countries dependent on revenues from energy reserves. Energy
transition has a profound impact on market development, influencing various
aspects in energy markets such as supply chain, regulations, investments,
consumer behaviors and business models. Transitioning into clean energy
technologies, critical minerals needed for these technologies have surged over
the past years, and the demand for them will increase quadruple by 2030 which
will reflect on renewable energy market, changing the market dynamics and energy
trading of commodities. Clean energy markets drive investment and innovation in
energy technologies, infrastructure, and efficiency measures. Market incentives
and regulatory frameworks influence the deployment of renewable energy projects,
the adoption of energy-efficient technologies, and the development of
alternative fuels, contributing to energy security, diversification, and
resilience. Types of Energy Sources: Renewable vs. Non-Renewable The Rise of
Renewable Energy Sources Renewable energy sources play a crucial role in
decarbonizing our energy and electricity systems. The share of renewable energy
sources in electricity production has been steadily increasing since 2005 and is
expected to exceed 70% of gross electricity production by 2030. This surge in
renewable energy sources will significantly alter energy market dynamics. Global
investments have already started flowing into renewable energy technologies,
with over 1.7 trillion US dollars invested in clean energy from 2021 to 2023,
surpassing investments in fossil fuels. The rise of renewable energy sources has
been policy driven so far, paralleling technological developments has been
progressing with a significant public support to renewables deployment. There
are different supports that have been adopted which have various impacts on the
market and market development. In order to reduce overall support costs and the
distortive impact on the market, more market-based instruments are needed to
move forward with sustainable market growth, such as power purchase agreements
(PPAs) as self-standing finance instruments. These instruments are complementary
to the government-based support schemes, as PPAs are long-term energy supply
agreements concluded directly between a power consumer and a power producer.
PPAs can provide producers with certainty regarding a specific income, while
also enabling buyers to benefit from stable electricity prices. The PPA market
has steadily grown over the past decade, and given recent fluctuations in
electricity prices, demand for PPAs is expected to further increase as
businesses and electricity retailers seek protection from volatile energy
prices. Recent trends have shown that the rise of renewable energy sources will
unprecedently continue. While five years ago, every $1 invested in fossil fuels,
$1 was directed to clean energy, today we observe a shift on the ratio to $1.80
in favor of clean energy. This shows that energy finance and renewables market
development are expected to grow and projected to become more structured. To
facilitate this growth, long-term investments and a pipeline of bankable
projects are needed, as discussed later in the module. These elements are
crucial to navigate challenges in high-risk markets and promote financial
viability for renewable energy projects. Economic Viability of Renewable Energy
Renewable energy investments have historically relied heavily on various support
programs. However, the necessity of such support mechanisms depends on the cost
competitiveness of renewable technologies, a metric that has shown significant
improvement over time. The generation costs of onshore wind and solar
photovoltaic (PV) electricity, in particular, have witnessed dramatic declines
in the last decade. Projections suggest that by 2030 solar PV and onshore wind
electricity will reach a cost-competitive level, largely due to increases in
energy and carbon prices and advances in the flexibility of power systems,
bringing more attractive investments for the energy market. Moreover, renewable
technology budgets (RTBs) are emerging as important factors in reducing the
negative environmental impacts of economic growth. RTBs are key components of
innovation in green energy, aligned with the SDG7 to provide global access to
low-cost electricity. To achieve this goal, it is imperative to increase
investments in wind, solar, thermal and other clean energy sources while
creating a conducive environment for energy financing, particularly emerging and
developing markets. By supporting innovation through RTBs, the development of
green technologies can be accelerated and, as a result, the share of renewable
energy sources in the overall energy mix can be increased. This shift towards
renewable energy sources will reduce market dependency on coal, gas and oil,
thus promoting a more sustainable and long-term market development, while
mitigating the impact of climate change. Challenges Facing Renewable Energy
Markets While the sustainable energy transition brings many opportunities, from
economic growth to job creation, there are also market challenges that need to
be considered to facilitate long-term sustainable development. There remains
potential for further reductions in investment costs in the future. However,
bottlenecks in global supply chains and increases in commodity prices may slow
or even reverse the decline in investment costs. Renewable energy projects are
often associated with certain risks that make potential investors uncomfortable.
As some countries begin to scale back their subsidy mechanisms, some studies are
pointing out the possibility of a financing gap for investments in renewable
technology. Moreover, renewable energy markets may reflect regional disparities
as capital tends to flow to more mature markets, creating a gap in market
development and energy financing. For example, although Africa accounts for one-
fifth of the global population, the region currently attracts only 3% of global
energy investment. Regional concentration of the energy market may also affect
project costs. Currently, the capital cost of energy projects in African
countries is at least 2-3 times higher than in developed economies and China,
which increases project costs and hinders investment. Related to today’s
volatile conditions, renewable energy sector is confronted with numerous
challenges as they strive to mitigate risk and enhance the resilience of their
supply chains. Securing access to raw materials and rare earth metals at stable
prices, amid a tightening commodity squeeze affecting the wind and solar
industries can be a challenge to meet decreasing demand for decarbonization
efforts. Increasing demand for renewable resources has led to increased factory
utilization rates in industry and increased vulnerability to supply chain
disruptions unless additional capacity is added. To balance the supply and
demand in renewable energy supply chains, significant investments remain
essential. Moreover, the dominance of certain regions and the limited number of
suppliers further weaken the resilience of renewable energy supply chains. For
example, 79 percent of global polysilicon capacity is concentrated in China,
particularly in the Xinjiang province, posing supply risks for wind and solar
energy players globally. Additionally, given the extensive capabilities and
machinery required to install new wind and solar capacity, improving logistics
and installation capacities continue to be a vital priority. Government
Incentives and Support for Renewable Energy Policy instruments implemented to
support the introduction of renewable energy have evolved over time. What is
important to stimulate the renewable energy market by attracting private
financing, increasing credit ratings, reducing capital costs and strengthening
local financial resources is to ensure an enabling environment and improve
governance. These finance tools are discussed throughout the module. Governments
across the world generally implement incentive policies to actualize the rapid
increase in renewable energy capacity. In all renewable energy incentive
policies, the price mechanism, including guaranteed policies and tender
policies, directly affects the competitiveness of renewable energy resources
produced in the electricity market. Feed-in policies are often used to enable
renewable energy development at the early stage. With the development of
electricity generation technologies from renewable energy, the costs of energy
obtained from renewable energy have decreased. Auction or tendering mechanisms
are becoming increasingly popular, further encouraging competition and the
development of technologies. Since 2018, more countries have used the tendering
mechanism instead of feed-in tariffs in market settlement for renewable energy
producers. This shows that the participation of renewable energy in market
competition has become an inevitable development trend and offers significant
opportunities for long-term sustainable economic growth and market development.
Another government incentive and support for decarbonization is that
implementation of consumer tax credits for electric vehicles (EVs). In these
policies, governments aim to subsidize buyers to switch over and purchase EVs
instead of traditional cars with internal combustion engines, and the trends
show that these policies facilitate this shift in transportation. Governments
also have adopted a below-market finance to push supply side policies for
promoting their firms and local production in the supply chain segments of
component production and final assembly of solar PV panels. This can be seen as
either below-market borrowings, where governments offer support through debt
financing, or below-market equity, where governments provide equity finance
under terms inconsistent with market principles. In both forms, below-market
financing can provide a competitive advantage in both local and global markets
by lowering companies’ cost of capital. Historical Development of Energy Markets
Evolvement of energy markets is intricately linked to energy transitions. Energy
transition refers to a shift from one energy technology or source to another one
which effect market dynamics parallelly from production processes to market
policies and regulations – whole value chain while stimulating socioeconomic
impacts. As energy transition depends on demand for energy services, energy
markets have been evolving to meet this demand, adjusting supply levels,
investing in new technologies, and establishing new market regulations and
pricing mechanisms. Figure. Global primary energy consumption by source showing
changes in energy patterns historically. (Source: Our World in Data) Some
literature discusses that today’s energy transition can be classified as the
fourth global energy transition. According to these discussions, the first
energy transition occurred from biomass to coal, which experienced growth
ranging from 5 to 50% between 1840 and 1890. This was followed by the rapid
penetration of oil into the energy balance and market, with its share increasing
from 3% in 1915 to 45% by 1975. Subsequently, the third energy transition can be
characterized as the partial replacement of coal and oil by natural gas, with
its share increasing from 3% in 1930 to 23% in 2017. Finally, today’s energy
transition from fossil fuels to low-carbon energy sources stems from a different
driver – climate change. This means with sustainable energy transformation; the
energy market has been mainly evolving from a pressing and urgent need to
address global imperative to achieve 1.5 °C goal rapidly. Key Players in the
Energy Market: Producers, Distributors, Regulators In the energy market
landscape, key players have distinct roles in shaping the production,
distribution and regulation of energy sources and technologies. In energy market
open to competition, the three main parties are producers and suppliers,
distribution system operator, and regulator. In this market structure,
electricity generated at power plants undergoes multiple transactions in the
wholesale market before reaching the end use consumer. These transactions
typically involve large quantities of electricity and a diverse array of
participants, including energy producers, retailers, investment banks, and major
energy consumers. This intricate relation and interplay among stakeholders
underscore the complexity of energy markets, where supply chains intersect, and
transactions drive the flow of energy resources from production to consumption.
Figure. Global value chain in renewable energy (Source: OECD) The supply chain
of renewable energy encompasses five phases such as procurement, generation,
transmission, distribution, and demand. These phases include the whole value
chain of renewable energy, from raw materials as an input to the final product
as an output. This whole process can be also divided into three main processes
as shown in Figure as upstream, midstream, and downstream. Throughout this value
chain, each renewable energy source (e.g., wind, solar, biomass, hydropower and
geothermal) has its own characteristics in this supply chain. For example, solar
has been characterized by strong growth in technology investment and many
innovative initiatives such as technological innovations in mini grids, pay-as-
you-go and peer-to-peer technologies. Unlike fossil energy sources like oil, gas
and coal, electricity is immaterial. Other energy sources can be contained and
quantified with a volume and stored on a large scale, but electricity must be
generated from a primary energy source on a large scale such as from solar
photovoltaics, hydro power plants and wind turbines. This also reflects on the
electricity market and supply chain, which requires a technical capacity that
relies on the electricity grid to function. This characteristic underscore the
importance of key players in the electricity market to ensure the efficient
generation, transmission, and distribution of electricity to meet the demands of
consumers and maintain the stability of the energy market. The Global Energy
Market International Trade in Energy Commodities International trade is a
pivotal part of the global energy market, facilitating the movement of energy
commodities across the globe to meet demand, optimize resource utilization, and
support economic development. Energy trading plays a critical role within the
global financial system, involving the exchange of energy commodities in
financial markets. It serves as a crucial starting point in the energy supply
chain. In this context, metals will be fundamental in climate change mitigation
efforts. This is reflected in the energy transition, which is a commodities
transition as the same time, metals and minerals are critical inputs for
decarbonization, clean electrification and renewable technologies such as wind
tribunes and electric vehicles (EVs). The importance of minerals and metals can
be observable in the rapid growth of commodity trading pools, which reached
close to $100 billion in 2022 as nearly doubled year over year. In this context,
the energy transition will change the landscape of energy commodities in
international energy trade from fossil fuels to critical minerals for renewable
energy technologies. In addition, it is predicted that the share of metals and
minerals in the value pool will gradually increase in the coming years. The
transition from hydrocarbons to low-carbon energy sources will offer
opportunities in the long term. The rapid expansion of clean energy technologies
indicates a significant increase in mineral demand as part of the energy
transition. Particularly, considering the rapid expansion of electric vehicles
(EVs) will increase the demand for critical minerals as shown in the Figure.
However, as markets evolve, players waiting for liquidity will have limited
options. Producers, traders and large energy companies can develop new
capabilities, expand into different parts of the value chain and pursue new
opportunities. Additionally, their actions can support the energy transition by
enabling capital flows to increase supply and build infrastructure. Figure.
Electric car vs conventional car in using minerals (Source: McKinsey) Parallel
to these developments, reduction in deployment cost of distributed energy
sources (DERs), such as solar photovoltaic (PV) coupled with technical capacity
growth have been changing the patterns of energy trading, open the way for
energy consumers to sell energy from their own energy storage system (ESS). This
can alter the energy landscape that depends on fossil fuels commodities and
geographic concentrations of these by presenting the energy exchange market.
Energy Security and Geopolitics on Energy Markets The current energy crisis has
raised significant questions on how to strengthen short-term energy security
while remaining committed to the green transition, a challenge amplified by the
recent consensus at COP28 to transition away from fossil fuels. Dependence on
fossil fuels has been impacting countries with price fluctuations and supply
chain disruptions. Energy markets had created interdependencies between energy-
producing and energy-consuming countries, as well as the interconnectedness of
regional and global events. This has been historically presenting geopolitical
implications that political imbalances where resource-rich countries often had a
position to influence the global energy policies and market. Moreover, with the
impact of global events and international relations, this has created strategic
alliances, in some cases international tensions and interventions. Geopolitics
of energy markets has influenced many regional dynamics as it dependent on
geographical flows. These flows are geographically narrow passages known as
critical chokepoints, where oil transit and market had been concentrated.
Geographic size of these passages makes them open to disruptions and blockades,
and overall energy security challenges. Another example, natural gas can be
transported on land through pipelines and on water through shipping routes. Any
global contention on these routes can affect energy market and prices, not only
have impact on energy security challenges but also causing food insecurity
caused by inflation. Transition to sustainable energy systems presents many
opportunities by reducing dependence on a single energy source or supplier.
Unlike finite energy sources such as oil, gas and coal, renewable energy can
lead to economic diversification and protect the market from price volatilities.
However, as renewable capacity is expanded, new energy security risks such as
potential import dependence on transition metals emerge. For example, most
production stages in electric vehicle battery supply chains have high geographic
concentrations, with more than 70% of global production concentrated in three
leading countries. While China plays a dominant role in the midstream of the
supply chain - raw materials processing and component production - it competes
with Japan and Korea in the downstream stages of the supply chain, raising
concerns about market concentration. However, although new energy security
challenges have emerged with the sustainable energy transition, solutions have
made progress. For example, metals are not all concentrated in a single country
and are mutually substitutable. If strategic actions are taken and support is
provided to strengthen energy security, the transition to clean energy will be
just, fair, and accessible for everyone. Future Trends in Global Energy
Consumption The future of global energy consumption will be shaped by the
increasing global population growth, manufacturing production, and overall
consumption, in line with GDP expansion. These consumption trends will also
influence market size, with the increasing demand for renewable energy leading
to an expansion of the market. According to projections, the share of fossil
fuels in the global energy supply, which has remained stagnant at around 80% for
decades, is expected to decline to 73% by 2030, coinciding with the peak of
global energy-related carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions by 2025. However, despite
an increase in energy production from non-fossil fuel-based resources through
2050, it is forecasted to fall short of meeting the 1.5 °C goal. Achieving this
goal requires the energy market to align with commitments such as tripling
global renewable power capacity and doubling energy efficiency. Furthermore,
commitments from the fossil fuel industry, particularly oil and gas companies,
to align activities with the Paris Agreement are crucial, beginning with a 75%
reduction in methane emissions from operations. Additionally, establishing
large-scale financing mechanisms is imperative to triple clean energy investment
in emerging and developing economies for a net-zero emission future. Energy
efficiency will have a crucial role in future trends in energy consumption which
is expected to unprecedently increasing alongside global demand. Future trends
show that taking decisive action to address energy demand holds potential to 31%
reduction in energy intensity and potential annual savings of up to $2 trillion
by 2030. Through energy savings, increased energy efficiency, and value chain
collaboration, such initiatives and actions hold the promise of enhancing access
to reliable energy while attracting energy investments in emerging and
developing countries. Challenges and Opportunities in Energy Markets Market
Barriers to Energy Innovation As we are transitioning into sustainable energy,
emerging technologies and innovations have started to have a key role in driving
decarbonization. From blockchain technologies to developments in energy storage,
while these technologies bring innovative solutions to the transition to low-
carbon energy sources, there are some challenges associated with market barriers
to renewable energy innovation. As energy transition has been rapidly integrated
in energy market, this process not only involve around technologies, but also
includes policies and regulations, user practices, data availability and markets
and behavioral change among electricity consumers. Therefore, market barriers on
energy innovation can stem from different factors such as technological,
economic, regulatory and market. One of the examples of these technologies is
energy storage, which has been a pivotal technology for innovation. However,
this rapidly evolving technology will find it difficult to compete with
traditional generators in the provision of electric system services under
current regulatory regimes which will likely hinder innovation. The main
challenge in fully utilizing storage in the balancing market is the difficulty
in converting all the operational benefits it offers into monetary value when
supplying balancing energy through wholesale electricity markets. As innovations
often require R&D to develop new technologies, this initial R&D process can pose
a barrier to entry in the market, particularly for securing investments,
especially from the private sector. The uncertainty and risk associated with
early-stage R&D projects may keep private sector investing, who typically seek
financial viability to returns on their investments. However, there are
financing tools to address these market barriers that can be implemented such as
government grants and subsidies, venture capital, public-private partnerships
(PPPs), crowdfunding platforms and tax incentives. Opportunities for Investment
in Energy Markets In recent years, the renewable energy sector has garnered
significant attention from investors for several reasons, primarily due to the
growing concern over climate change and the global urgency to mitigate its
effects. This pressing need for energy transition has brought forth numerous
opportunities associated with sustainable energy transformation. Not only does
it offer a cleaner, more affordable, and reliable energy market, but it also
addresses concerns surrounding energy security. In 2023, the renewable energy
sector has witnessed remarkable growth, with investments exceeding $1.7
trillion. This surge in clean energy investments represents a 24% increase
compared to investments in fossil fuels in 2023. The market cycle of renewable
energy sector completely differentiates from the traditional energy sectors.
Unlike the traditional energy sectors relying on the depleting fossil fuels,
renewable energy depends on unlimited supply of natural resources (e.g., solar,
wind, hydropower and geothermal). In this context, market players can diversify
their portfolio and risk management by allocating investments in renewable
energy technologies, reducing dependency on fossil fuels-based energy sector.
Investments are already flowing to take advantage of the massive deployment of
renewable energy technologies and attractive opportunities that will be brought
by energy transition such as socioeconomic benefits like long-term sustainable
economic growth and job creation. As financial markets are projecting the peak
demand for fossil fuels and rapid growth in emerging renewable technologies,
capital is moving to this market accordingly. Investments also offer the
opportunity to address concerns regarding climate uncertainty, which is
intensified by global warming. In this context, accelerating the deployment of
renewable energy will bring interconnected opportunities, protecting the market
from climate uncertainty in the long term by contributing to a climate-safe
future, enhancing human welfare, and paving the way for reliable, affordable,
and clean energy access. Growing demand for renewable energy, technological
advancements and growing cost-effectiveness have strengthened renewable energy
market for investors to open new opportunities for countries and businesses to
transform their energy systems into sustainable energy technologies. The Future
of Energy Markets: Scenarios and Predictions As we have been experiencing a
decade of deployment in renewable energy, future trends in global energy
consumption will be shaped by this increasing capacity of renewables. While
recent COP28 countries were committed to triple up renewables and double up
energy efficiency, these commitments can have their reflection on energy markets
and future scenarios and predictions already set to stage for unprecedented
growth in renewable energy market. Future scenarios show that by 2030 there will
be almost 10 times as many electric cars on the road, with renewable energy
accounting for nearly half of the global power mix up from 30% today. By 2030,
it is projected that heat pumps and other electric heating systems outpacing
fossil fuel boilers, and investments into new offshore wind projects will be
three times much than new coal and gas fired power plants. This growing momentum
on renewable energy technologies and shift in the global energy market will have
a massive impact on fossil fuels peak demand in coal, oil and natural gas.
According to the IEA scenario, the share of fossil fuels in global energy
supply, which has remained stagnant for decades at around 80%, declines to 73%
by 2030, with global energy-related carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions peaking by
2025 Alongside these new dynamics, digital and data transformation are the most
vital elements for the future of the energy market. Digitalization can navigate
the complexities of future energy dynamics and decarbonization through
innovative tools such as AI, IoT and blockchain while decentralizing renewables
into the deployment of small-scale renewable energy generation and storage. This
energy and digitalization intersection not only provides energy access to all
areas but also produce and bank electricity to avoid shortages and surging
prices, facilities and equipment helps organizations manage their energy use
with more precision, reducing costs and guarding against risks. The relationship
between digital transformation, decarbonization, and decentralization creates a
new role for energy consumers, allowing them to take on a dual role as producer-
consumers, also known as prosumers. These prosumers continue to purchase
electricity as consumers, but with the aid of digital technologies such as peer-
to-peer energy trading (P2P), they can now participate in producing, storing,
and selling their electricity. Moreover, these digital technologies can provide
data to help them modulate their energy demand, track their energy purchases,
and take advantage of favorable market prices. Scaling Up Pipeline of Bankable
Energy Projects Conceptualizing Pipeline of Bankable Energy Projects A pipeline
of bankable energy projects refers to a curated list of investment-ready
projects in the energy sector that have been thoroughly vetted to ensure
financial viability and attractiveness to investors. These projects are
considered "bankable" because they demonstrate a high likelihood of delivering
predictable and sufficient cash flows to cover their operating costs and debt
obligations, thereby offering a reasonable assurance of profitability and risk
mitigation for potential financiers. Bankability plays a pivotal role in
attracting investment for energy access and transition. By ensuring projects are
bankable, countries can unlock private capital necessary for expanding access to
clean and sustainable energy, which is crucial for achieving global energy
transition goals. This involves not just financial investments but also capacity
building, technology transfer, and regulatory support to create a conducive
environment for sustainable energy projects. Definitions of Pipeline of Bankable
Energy Projects The concept of a "Pipeline of Bankable Energy Projects" refers
to the development and promotion of infrastructure projects that are attractive
to investors and ready for investment. The term "bankable" in the context of
energy projects implies that a project is financially viable, with a risk
profile that is acceptable to lenders, investors, and other financial entities.
Bankability is determined by a project's ability to meet or exceed certain
financial criteria and risk assessments, making it capable of securing funding
or investment. A "pipeline" refers to a systematic and strategic queue of such
projects, prepared and developed over time, to continuously attract and deploy
capital towards the energy sector's growth and sustainability. Bankability in
energy projects hinges on several critical factors. Firstly, the project must
have a well-structured risk-sharing protocol established during the project
development phase. This involves deciding on how risks will be allocated among
the various parties involved, ensuring that the project is attractive to
investors right from its conceptualization. Moreover, it's essential to have
enabling measures such as policy and tariff regulations, and mechanisms that
optimize revenue, risk structuring, and risk mitigation to assure investors of
cost-effective, affordable, and accessible energy. Criteria for Bankability The
criteria for bankability extend beyond financial viability to include aspects
such as environmental sustainability, social impact, and governance practices.
For instance, projects that incorporate innovative funding structures and are
supported by public-private partnerships (PPPs) tend to have a higher chance of
being bankable. These projects benefit from technical and financial support
during their preparation phase, making them more likely to attract necessary
funding. Criteria for assessing the bankability of energy projects include: --
Financial Performance: Projects must show robust financial models with
attractive returns on investment (ROI) and internal rate of return (IRR). --
Risk Management: Effective identification, allocation, and mitigation of project
risks, including credit, market, operational, and environmental risks. --
Legal and Regulatory Compliance: Adherence to local and international legal and
regulatory requirements, including clear land rights, environmental permits, and
contractual frameworks. --     Technical Feasibility: Demonstrated technical
viability through detailed feasibility studies and the adoption of proven
technologies. --        Socio-economic and Environmental Impact: Positive social
and environmental impact, including sustainability and community benefits. The
Role of Bankability in Attracting Investment for Energy Access and Transition
Bankability plays a crucial role in attracting investment for energy access and
transition by providing a clear and compelling case for the financial viability
of projects. By enhancing the bankability of energy projects, countries can
unlock private and public capital necessary for expanding access to clean,
sustainable energy and achieving their energy transition and climate goals. This
involves creating an enabling environment that includes policy support,
financial incentives, and risk mitigation mechanisms to facilitate investment in
the energy sector. The role of bankability in attracting investment for energy
access and transition is multifaceted and crucial for the successful
implementation of clean energy projects in emerging and developing economies. An
unprecedented increase in clean energy investment is required to steer these
economies towards a path of sustainable development and net-zero emissions.
Investment in clean energy within these regions declined to less than USD 150
billion in 2020, highlighting the need for a significant uptick in funding to
meet international climate goals. To achieve this, investments need to expand
more than sevenfold, to above USD 1 trillion annually by the end of the 2020s.
This increase in investment would not only address climate change but also bring
substantial economic and societal benefits. However, achieving this requires
comprehensive efforts to improve both the domestic environment for clean energy
investment and international capital inflows. The energy transition in
developing countries necessitates a transformative approach to the power sector
infrastructure, including the enhancement of energy efficiency and renewable
energy sources, as well as the reduction of reliance on coal-fired power
generation. The lack of funding for energy transition and network infrastructure
in these regions often results in higher electricity costs, limited access to
energy efficiency or renewable energy projects, and a dependency on high-cost
fossil fuel projects, effectively creating a poverty trap. It is estimated that
low- and middle-income countries host a significant majority of the global
population without access to electricity, underscoring the critical need for
investment in energy transition efforts. Challenges in Scaling up Energy
Projects in developing countries and Emerging Economies Scaling up energy
projects in developing countries and emerging economies faces numerous
challenges, such as limited access to finance due to perceived higher risks,
insufficient regulatory frameworks, lack of technical expertise, and the need
for significant upfront capital. These challenges necessitate innovative
financing mechanisms, supportive policies, and international cooperation to
enhance the bankability of projects in these regions. The developing countries
also face the triple penalty without the means to fund an energy transition and
network infrastructure. They often pay more for electricity, cannot access
energy efficiency or renewable energy projects, and are locked into high-cost
fossil fuel projects. This situation underscores the need for a comprehensive
financing approach that addresses the financing challenges and develops pathways
to overcome them. Financial Constraints Capital Availability: One of the primary
hurdles is the need for substantial investment. The annual clean energy
investments in emerging and developing economies need to more than triple from
USD 770 billion in 2022 to as much as USD 2.8 trillion by the early 2030s to
meet rising energy demands and align with climate goals. This escalation is
beyond the capacity of public financing alone, indicating a critical need for
private capital mobilization. For instance, blended finance also plays an
essential role, where increased public funding is used in partnership with
private sector capital to reduce project risks and entice more private
investment. High Cost of Capital: Emerging economies often face higher borrowing
costs due to perceived risks, which can make clean energy projects unattractive
to investors. The need for concessional finance and blended finance structures
is emphasized to mitigate these risks and lower the cost of capital.Concessional
financing, estimated to require USD 80 billion to USD 100 billion annually by
the early 2030s, is highlighted as crucial for attracting the necessary private
investment for energy transition in these regions. Additionally, the potential
of green and sustainability-linked bonds is noted, provided there are harmonized
industry guidelines and robust certification mechanisms. Regulatory and Policy
Challenges Unclear Regulatory Frameworks: Inconsistent and unclear regulatory
environments can deter investment. Effective policy reforms are needed to create
stable, transparent, and supportive regulatory frameworks that encourage clean
energy investments. Policy reforms in emerging and developing economies also
play a pivotal role in attracting investment. Barriers such as fossil fuel
subsidies, lengthy licensing processes, unclear land use rights, and
inappropriate pricing policies increase the cost of clean energy projects or
deter investment altogether. Addressing these policy issues is fundamental to
unlocking the investment needed for the energy transition. Subsidies and
Tariffs: Fossil fuel subsidies and inappropriate pricing policies distort the
energy market, making renewable energy projects less competitive. Phasing out
these subsidies and implementing fair tariff systems are crucial steps.
Technical and Infrastructure Deficiencies Lack of Infrastructure: Adequate
infrastructure for renewable energy generation, transmission, and distribution
is often lacking. Investments in grid infrastructure are essential to support
the uptake of renewable energy. Technological Gaps: There is also a need for
capacity building and technology transfer to support the adoption of clean
energy technologies, particularly in areas where such technologies have not yet
reached cost competitiveness. Socio-Economic Considerations Energy Access and
Equity: Ensuring that the transition to clean energy does not exacerbate energy
access issues or lead to inequitable outcomes is vital. Policies and investments
must prioritize universal energy access and affordability. Job Creation and
Economic Transition: The energy transition offers opportunities for job creation
and economic development. However, careful planning is required to manage the
transition for sectors and communities currently dependent on fossil fuels.
Challenge Opportunity Capital Availability Leveraging Blended Finance: Utilizing
a mix of public and private funds to increase the pool of available capital for
investments. High Cost of Capital Concessional Finance and Guarantees:
Implementing concessional finance and risk guarantee mechanisms to reduce the
cost of capital. Unclear Regulatory Frameworks Policy Reform: Establishing
clear, stable regulatory environments that incentivize investments in renewable
energy. Fossil Fuel Subsidies and Tariffs Subsidy Reform and Fair Tariff
Systems: Phasing out fossil fuel subsidies and implementing fair pricing to make
renewable energy more competitive. Lack of Infrastructure Investment in Grid
Infrastructure: Directing funds towards building and upgrading infrastructure to
support renewable energy. Technological Gaps Technology Transfer and Capacity
Building: Sharing cutting-edge technologies and know-how to bridge the
technological gap. Energy Access and Equity Universal Energy Access: Ensuring
that energy projects contribute to broader access to energy, particularly in
underserved areas. Job Creation and Economic Transition Sustainable Job
Creation: Capitalizing on the energy transition to create jobs and support
economic development in new sectors. Mobilizing Private Capital Innovative
Financing Models: Exploring new financing models such as green bonds,
sustainability-linked bonds, and public-private partnerships (PPPs) to attract
private investments. International Cooperation Global Partnerships:
Strengthening international cooperation for technical assistance, knowledge
sharing, and financial support. Key Barriers to Creating Pipeline of Bankable
Energy Projects Creating a pipeline of bankable energy projects involves
overcoming a series of challenges that both developers and financiers face.
These challenges range from technical aspects and regulatory hurdles to market
and financial risks, each with its own complexities. Key Barriers for Developers
Technical Challenges: Renewable energy projects often encounter unpredictable
factors such as delays in land acquisition, changes in equipment prices, and
technical uncertainties regarding the performance and longevity of technologies
like solar modules and wind turbines. These challenges can lead to project
delays and cost overruns, affecting the project's bankability. Regulatory and
Policy Hurdles: Changes in regulatory frameworks, including tariffs, duties, and
open access regulations, can significantly alter the return profiles of
renewable projects. Unpredictable regulatory environments deter investment by
creating an uncertain operating landscape for developers. Market and Financial
Risks: Developers have to navigate risks related to untimely payments for power
sold, fluctuating module prices, and the potential for regulatory changes
affecting project economics. Such financial uncertainties contribute to the
perception of renewable energy projects as high-risk investments. Key Barriers
for Financiers Perceived Risks vs. Actual Risks: Investors often perceive the
risks associated with renewable energy projects as higher than they actually
are. This perception can be due to uncertainties in market dynamics, regulatory
changes, and the technical performance of renewable technologies. Lack of
Bankable Projects: There is a notable scarcity of projects that meet the strict
investment criteria of institutional investors, which includes robust financial
returns and minimal risks. The absence of a substantial pipeline of bankable
projects restricts the flow of capital into the renewable energy sector. Issues
with Policy and Regulatory Frameworks: Inconsistent and unpredictable policy and
regulatory environments pose significant challenges for financiers. Issues such
as the financial health of off-takers (like state-owned utilities), currency
risks, and the absence of long-term financing mechanisms create barriers to
financing renewable energy projects. Challenges Developers Financiers Technical
Challenges - Difficulties in land acquisition. - Uncertainties in technology
performance and longevity - Grid connection and evacuation issues. - Assessing
technology risks. - Evaluating project feasibility and long-term performance.
Regulatory and Policy Hurdles - Unpredictable changes in tariffs and duties -
Challenges in navigating open access regulations - Delays due to regulatory
approvals. - Impact of regulatory changes on project viability - Risks
associated with policy instability. Market and Financial Risks - Fluctuations in
equipment prices. Risk of untimely payments from off-takers -Currency and
inflation risks affecting project costs. - Perceived higher risks vs. actual
risks leading to cautious investment - Evaluating returns in light of market
uncertainties. Perceived Risks vs. Actual Risks - Misalignment between project
proposals and realistic technical capabilities. - Difficulty in accurately
assessing risks due to lack of data or precedents -Overestimation of risks
leading to higher financing costs. Lack of Bankable Projects - Difficulty in
meeting financiers' criteria for bankability due to above challenges. - Scarcity
of projects that fulfill investment criteria, leading to limited investment
opportunities. Issues with Policy and Regulatory Frameworks - Navigating through
complex and sometimes contradictory regulatory environments. - Concerns over the
stability and predictability of policy and regulatory frameworks affecting long-
term investments. Strategies for Scaling up the pipeline of bankable sustainable
energy projects To scale up the pipeline of bankable sustainable energy
projects, a multi-faceted approach is necessary, focusing on addressing project
development hurdles, risk mitigation, public-private partnerships (PPPs), and
innovative financing mechanisms. Addressing Project Development Hurdles A robust
supply of bankable projects is crucial for scaling up financing in clean energy
and sustainable infrastructure, particularly in emerging markets and developing
economies (EMDEs). The process involves overcoming project implementation
hurdles such as conceptualization, prioritization, feasibility and socio-
economic impact assessments, and financial and contractual structuring. This
requires extensive technical expertise to navigate environmental, social,
regulatory, and economic factors, as well as implementation readiness.
Comprehensive Project Planning and Assessment Effective project planning and
assessment are foundational to overcoming development hurdles. This involves
conducting thorough feasibility studies, environmental impact assessments, and
socio-economic evaluations to ensure the project's viability. It's crucial to
identify potential challenges early in the development process and devise
strategies to address them, including technical solutions, environmental
mitigation measures, and community engagement plans. Stakeholder Engagement and
Community Participation Engaging with stakeholders, including local communities,
government agencies, and potential investors, from the early stages of project
development is key to identifying and addressing concerns. Open dialogue and
participatory approaches can help mitigate opposition, secure necessary permits,
and foster a supportive environment for project implementation. For instance,
the REWA Solar project in India demonstrated the importance of involving a broad
range of stakeholders to address off-taker risks and ensure project bankability.
Navigating Regulatory and Policy Frameworks Understanding and navigating the
regulatory and policy landscapes are critical to project development. This
involves staying abreast of changes in energy policies, environmental
regulations, and land use planning. Working closely with regulatory bodies and
policymakers can help identify potential regulatory hurdles early and find ways
to address them. In some cases, advocating for regulatory changes or policy
support may be necessary to enable project development. Leveraging Technical
Expertise and Innovation Technical challenges, such as integrating renewable
energy into existing grid infrastructure or adapting to site-specific
environmental conditions, require specialized expertise and innovative
solutions. Collaborating with research institutions, technology providers, and
industry experts can bring in the necessary technical know-how and innovative
approaches to overcome these hurdles. Establishing partnerships for technology
transfer and capacity building can also be beneficial. Securing Financing and
Mitigating Financial Risks Accessing financing and mitigating financial risks
are among the most significant hurdles in sustainable energy project
development. Utilizing innovative financing mechanisms, such as green bonds,
blended finance, and risk mitigation instruments, can help attract investment.
Additionally, developing robust financial models and securing commitments from
off-takers and investors early in the project development process can enhance
project bankability and attract necessary funding. Adapting to Market Dynamics
and Competitiveness The rapidly changing energy market and competitiveness among
renewable energy projects necessitate a proactive approach to market analysis
and strategy development. Keeping abreast of market trends, technology
advancements, and competitor activities can help identify opportunities and
challenges. Developing a competitive value proposition, including unique
technological solutions or cost efficiencies, can help differentiate the project
in a crowded market. Risk Mitigation and De-Risking Measures Effective
identification, structuring, and management of risks associated with greenfield
projects can make these investments more attractive. Strategies include reducing
off-taker risk by securing guaranteed energy off-take agreements, addressing
transmission and evacuation infrastructure gaps, and creating transparent
auction processes for project bidding. Public and private sector collaboration
is key to structuring projects that are both bankable and capable of delivering
cost-effective, affordable, and accessible energy. Enhancing the bankability of
sustainable energy projects through development and risk mitigation involves a
comprehensive approach that spans project inception to execution, focusing on
strategic planning, risk allocation, and innovative financing structures.
Strategic Contract Drafting and Project Delivery Selection At the outset, it's
crucial to draft key construction contract provisions that allocate risks
effectively and choose an appropriate project delivery system. This involves
considering whether a project delivery model provides a 'one-stop shop,' such as
Engineering, Procurement, and Construction (EPC) or design-build, which can
significantly reduce risk by offering a single entity responsible in case of
claims related to equipment’s performance. Identifying and Mitigating Technology
Risks Technology risks, especially with new or complex technologies, need
careful evaluation and a plan for mitigation. This step is vital to prevent
disputes and claims that can arise due to untested or specialized technology.
Developing a Reasonable Schedule and Budget A common cause of claims and
disputes is the failure to prepare a realistic budget or project schedule. It's
essential for all parties to devise a budget and a schedule that accurately
accounts for the project's needs, including appropriate provisions for delays.
Active Owner Involvement and Dispute Resolution Mechanisms Owners can reduce
risk by vetting the contractor’s project team leadership and being actively
involved throughout the project. Additionally, establishing effective mechanisms
for dispute resolution in contracts can facilitate resolving issues without
resorting to litigation or arbitration. Understanding Bankability and Risk
Allocation The bankability of infrastructure projects is determined early in the
project development stage, where key risk-sharing protocols are decided.
Utilizing Project Preparation Facilities (PPFs) and conducting market sounding
exercises can help develop bankable, investment-ready projects by providing
technical support and incorporating lender feedback into the risk allocation
matrix. This approach ensures that risks are allocated to the right parties,
making the project more attractive to investors. Financial De-risking
Instruments Risk assessment and mitigation strategies, commonly referred to as
de-risking, are essential for encouraging sustainable energy investments. These
strategies involve various policy and financial instruments, securitization,
multilateral and bilateral funds for credit guarantees, and insurance products
to manage and mitigate the risks associated with investing in sustainable
energy. The UNDP De-risking Renewable Energy Investment (DREI) Framework The
DREI framework was launched in 2013 by the UNDP focusing on utility-scale
renewable energy. This report sets out the methodology’s theory of change,
identifying the need to reduce the high financing costs for renewable energy in
developing countries as a key task for policymakers acting today. The report
then describes the framework’s four stages: (i) risk environment, (ii) public
instruments, (iii) levelised cost and (iv) evaluation. To illustrate how the
framework can support decision-making in practice, the report presents findings
from illustrative case studies for utility-scale, on-shore wind energy in four
developing countries. It then draws on these results to discuss possible
directions for enhancing public interventions to scale-up renewable energy
investment. Source: https://www.undp.org/energy/our-flagship-
initiatives/derisking-renewable-energy-investment-framework Securitization
Securitization can play a pivotal role in de-risking sustainable energy
investments by pooling various financial assets and selling them to investors as
consolidated securities. This process can help diversify risk and attract a
broader range of investors by converting illiquid assets into liquid securities.
Multi-lateral/Bi-lateral Funds for Credit Guarantees Multi-lateral and bi-
lateral funds for credit guarantees provide an important safety net for
investors in sustainable energy projects. These funds mitigate the risk of
borrower default, making it easier for projects to secure financing. An example
is the Africa Energy Guarantee Facility (AEGF), which insures and reinsures
sustainable energy projects to reduce investment risks. Supported by entities
like Munich RE, the African Trade Insurance Agency (ATI), the European
Investment Bank (EIB), and the German Development Bank KfW, the AEGF enhances
access to finance for energy projects by mitigating risks through insurance
tools. Insurance Products Insurance products are crucial for managing the
financial risks associated with sustainable energy projects. They can cover a
wide range of risks, including but not limited to, political risk, natural
disasters, and technology performance risks. The European Commission and the
Energy Efficiency Financial Institutions Group (EEFIG) have developed tools like
the De-risking Energy Efficiency Platform (DEEP) and the Underwriting Toolkit to
help financial institutions, investors, and project promoters better understand
the benefits and risks associated with energy efficiency investments. Leveraging
Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) and Multilateral Engagements Public-Private
Partnerships PPPs are essential for mobilizing private capital and de-risking
investments in sustainable infrastructure projects. Trust and mutual
understanding between the public and private sectors are fundamental for
successful partnerships. Infrastructure investment should focus on societal
well-being and equity, ensuring communities have better access to services.
Risk-mitigating measures such as developing national infrastructure plans can
provide reassurance to investors and help align projects with country-specific
starting points and circumstances. One successful example of PPP is the REWA
Solar Project in India, which used a transparent auction process to attract
private investment, demonstrating how PPPs can address common barriers such as
off-taker risk, lack of proper transmission infrastructure, and unstable
subsidies. The project not only achieved a renewable energy tariff lower than
the cost of electricity from fossil fuels but also incorporated innovative
features like a three-tiered payment security mechanism. Multilateral Engagement
8Multilateral engagement involves the cooperation of multiple country
governments or international institutions to address global challenges, such as
climate change and sustainable development. This engagement can take the form of
financial support, policy advice, and technical assistance to develop and
implement sustainable energy projects. Multilateral development banks (MDBs) and
international financial institutions play a significant role in mobilizing
resources and providing the necessary guarantees or credit enhancements to make
projects more attractive to private investors. For instance, the World Bank and
the International Finance Corporation (IFC) have been involved in numerous
projects, offering support in project preparation, risk assessment, and
financial structuring to ensure bankability and attract private investments. The
Role of International Coalitions and Agreements International coalitions and
agreements can provide a framework for PPPs and multilateral engagement, setting
ambitious goals for sustainable development and climate change mitigation. These
coalitions facilitate knowledge sharing, best practices, and financial
mechanisms to support the deployment of sustainable energy solutions across
different regions. The partnership between HSBC and Temasek to establish a debt
financing platform dedicated to sustainable infrastructure projects in Southeast
Asia is an example of how international coalitions can catalyze significant
investment in sustainable infrastructure. This initiative aims to reduce the
climate change impact by filling the funding gap for sustainable infrastructure,
with the Asian Development Bank and Clifford Capital Holdings supporting the
platform as strategic partners. Innovative Financing Mechanisms Attracting
private capital at the scale and pace needed requires developing a larger flow
of clean energy projects that match investors' risk and return expectations.
This involves creating enabling environments for private investment, using
concessional finance strategically to mobilize private capital, and employing
new green financing instruments like green bonds and sustainability-linked
loans. Platforms such as the one created by HSBC and Temasek can catalyze
financing for marginally bankable sustainable infrastructure projects, with an
initial focus on Southeast Asia. footnote1) footnote2) CBI | What is green and
sustainable finance?.
https://api.charteredbanker.com/resource_listing/knowledge-hub-listing/what-is-
green-and-sustainable-finance.html footnote3)
https://assets.bbhub.io/professional/sites/24/Energy-Transition-Investment-
Trends-2024.pdf footnote4) https://about.bnef.com/blog/global-clean-energy-
investment-jumps-17-hits-1-8-trillion-in-2023-according-to-bloombergnef-report/#
:~:text=Electrified%20transport%20overtook%20the%20renewable,production%20plants
%20–%20among%20other%20things. footnote5) https://about.bnef.com/blog/global-
grid-gets-310-billion-lift-in-step-toward-net-zero/ footnote6)
https://unctad.org/publication/world-investment-report-
2023#:~:text=more%20support%20to%20attract%20clean%20energy%20investment&text=Wh
ile%20developing%20countries%20need%20about,about%20%24544%20billion%20in%202022
. footnote7) https://www.irena.org/Digital-Report/World-Energy-Transitions-
Outlook-2022 footnote8) https://gbdrrrf.org/system/files/privatefiles/internatio
nal_financial_institutions_ifis.pdf footnote9)
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/m/multilateral_development_bank.asp
footnote10) https://www.sei.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/report-2209a-ifis-
lhv2.pdf footnote11) https://www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/news-
insights/latest-news-headlines/private-equity-investment-in-renewable-energy-
soars-ytd-70681783 footnote12) https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-
investment-2023/overview-and-key-findings footnote13)
https://www.energy.gov/lpo/inflation-reduction-act-2022 footnote14) https://www.
imf.org/-/media/Files/Publications/GFSR/2023/October/English/ch3.ashx
footnote15) https://unfccc.int/most-requested/key-aspects-of-the-paris-agreement
footnote16) https://unfccc.int/topics/introduction-to-climate-finance
footnote17) https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352484721004066
footnote18) https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2211467X20300377
footnote19) https://www.imf.org/en/Blogs/Articles/2022/08/18/public-sector-must-
play-major-role-in-catalyzing-private-climate-finance footnote20)
https://utilitiesone.com/the-role-of-public-private-partnerships-in-sustainable-
infrastructure-energy# footnote21)
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/fandd/issues/Series/Back-to-Basics/Fiscal-
Policy footnote22) https://www.iea.org/reports/government-energy-spending-
tracker-2 footnote23) https://www.brookings.edu/articles/carbon-taxes-as-part-
of-the-fiscal-solution/ footnote24) https://www.imf.org/en/Topics/climate-
change/energy-subsidies footnote25) https://www.iea.org/reports/fossil-fuels-
consumption-subsidies-2022 footnote26)
https://www.ifc.org/content/dam/ifc/doc/mgrt/eiu-briefing-paper-ppps-final.pdf
footnote27) https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2023/04/10/from-india-to-
indonesia-green-bonds-help-countries-move-toward-sustainability footnote28)
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-document/31484/public-
private-partnership.pdf footnote29) https://ppp.worldbank.org/public-private-
partnership/library/ppp-reference-guide-introduction footnote30) (Cheng et al.,
2021). footnote31) (Potravnyi et al., 2020). footnote32) (Ahmad & Raza, 2020).
footnote33) (Lu et al., 2022). footnote34) https://econpapers.repec.org/article/
eeeecolec/v_3a88_3ay_3a2013_3ai_3ac_3ap_3a148-158.htm footnote35)
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352484723013847 footnote36) 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352484723013847#:~:text=As%2
0a%20result%2C%20the%20importance,but%20also%20enhance%20energy%20efficiency.
footnote37)       https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S23524847230
13847#:~:text=According%20to%20the%20United%20Nations,Hodge%20and%20Greve%2C%202
011). footnote38)
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0301421521003943
footnote39) (Carlos and Rui, 2011). footnote40) Sovacool (2013) footnote41)
Dinica (2008) footnote42) https://www.environmental-finance.com/content/the-
green-bond-hub/transition-bonds-could-2023-be-the-year-we-see-them-take-off.html
footnote43) https://www.ikem.de/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Brief.2_Dept-for-
nature-swaps.pdf footnote44)
https://documents.worldbank.org/pt/publication/documents-
reports/documentdetail/099805106052321586 footnote45) https://www.ecologic.eu/si
tes/default/files/publication/2023/World%20Bank%20State%20and%20Trends%20of%20Ca
rbon%20Pricing%202023.pdf footnote46) https://www.oecd.org/economic-
outlook/february-2024/ footnote47) https://www.qcintel.com/article/clean-energy-
investments-need-4tn-to-reach-net-zero-by-2050-iea-9384.html footnote48)
https://www.iea.org/policies/16568-2022-energy-crisis-support-to-vulnerable-
households-and-sectors# footnote49) https://www.ecologic.eu/sites/default/files/
publication/2023/World%20Bank%20State%20and%20Trends%20of%20Carbon%20Pricing%202
023.pdf footnote50) https://www.iea.org/commentaries/the-global-energy-crisis-
pushed-fossil-fuel-consumption-subsidies-to-an-all-time-high-in-2022 footnote51)
https://unfccc.int/news/cop27-reaches-breakthrough-agreement-on-new-loss-and-
damage-fund-for-vulnerable-countries footnote52)
https://unfccc.int/news/unlocking-climate-ambition-the-significance-of-
article-6-at-cop28 footnote53) https://www.un.org/en/climatechange/high-level-
expert-group footnote54) https://www.un.org/en/climatechange/net-zero-coalition
footnote55) https://www.unep.org/interactive/emissions-gap-report/2019/
footnote56) https://climatepromise.undp.org/news-and-stories/what-are-carbon-
markets-and-why-are-they-important footnote57) Climate Stories | Carbon Markets.
(2022b, May 24). World Bank.
https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2022/05/24/countries-on-the-cusp-of-
carbon-markets footnote58) frederick. (n.d.). New countries join carbon markets
in favor of a green economic transition – GreenTrade Future Carbon Credits.
Retrieved February 27, 2024, from https://greentrade.tech/new-countries-join-
carbon-markets-in-favor-of-a-green-economic-transition/ footnote59) European
Commission. (n.d.-a). International carbon market. Climate.ec.europa.eu.
https://climate.ec.europa.eu/eu-action/eu-emissions-trading-system-eu-
ets/international-carbon-market_en footnote60) Kizzier, K., Levin, K., &
Rambharos, M. (2019). What You Need to Know About Article 6 of the Paris
Agreement. Www.wri.org. https://www.wri.org/insights/what-you-need-know-about-
article-6-paris-agreement footnote61) Carbon Removal. (n.d.). World Resources
Institute. https://www.wri.org/initiatives/carbon-removal footnote62) Parry, I.
W. H. (n.d.). Chapter 1. What Is the Best Policy Instrument for Reducing CO2
Emissions? In www.elibrary.imf.org. International Monetary Fund.
https://www.elibrary.imf.org/display/book/9781616353933/ch01.xml footnote63)
Carbon Dioxide Removal. (n.d.). Energy.gov. https://www.energy.gov/fecm/carbon-
dioxide-removal footnote64) Carbon Dioxide Offset Investment in the Asia-Pacific
Forestry Sector: Opportunities and Constraints FAO Regional Office for Asia and
the Pacific Regional Wood Energy Development Programme in Asia Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Bangkok, Thailand. (n.d.).
Retrieved February 27, 2024, from https://www.fao.org/3/ad614e/ad614e00.pdf
footnote65) Pologeorgis, N. (2022, May 3). How Globalization Affects Developed
Countries. Investopedia.
https://www.investopedia.com/articles/economics/10/globalization-developed-
countries.asp footnote66) <a href="https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg3/">a fresh
report card</a> footnote67) <a href="https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/reso
urce/NDR1_ExecutiveSummary_Final.pdf">up to US$6 trillion by 2030</a>
footnote68) <a href="https://undp.medium.com/what-are-ndcs-and-why-are-they-
important-ee80ebb6ec2f">Nationally Determined Contributions, or NDCs</a>
footnote69) <a href="https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg3/resources/press/press-
release">three to six times lower than levels needed by 2030</a> footnote70)
https://www2.deloitte.com/uk/en/blog/net-zero/2023/understanding-the-compliance-
and-voluntary-carbon-trading-markets.html footnote71)
https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2022/07/27/what-you-need-to-know-
about-the-measurement-reporting-and-verification-mrv-of-carbon-credits
footnote72) <a href="https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/d21bfabc-
ac8a-4c41-bba7-e792cf29945c/China_Emissions_Trading_Scheme.pdf">one-seventh of
global carbon emissions</a> footnote73) <a href="https://unfccc.int/process-and-
meetings/the-kyoto-protocol/mechanisms-under-the-kyoto-protocol/the-clean-
development-mechanism">Clean Development Mechanism (CDM)</a> footnote74) <a
href="https://unfccc.int/kyoto_protocol">Kyoto Protocol in 1997</a> footnote75)
<a href="https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-kyoto-protocol/mechanisms-
under-the-kyoto-protocol/the-clean-development-mechanism">Under the CDM</a>
footnote76) World Energy Transitions Outlook 2023. (n.d.). Www.irena.org.
Retrieved February 27, 2024, from https://irena.org/Digital-Report/World-Energy-
Transitions-Outlook-2023 footnote77) SUMMARY OF COMMENTS AND VERRA RESPONSES:
FEBRUARY 2023 PUBLIC CONSULTATION ON THE VCS PROGRAM. (2024).
https://verra.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/02/Feb-2023-VCS-Program-Public-
Consultation-Responses.pdf footnote78) Peixoto, F. (2024). Voluntary carbon
offset programs in aviation: A systematic literature review. Transport Policy.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tranpol.2023.12.023 footnote79) Miltenberger, O.,
Jospe, C., & Pittman, J. (2021). The Good Is Never Perfect: Why the Current
Flaws of Voluntary Carbon Markets Are Services, Not Barriers to Successful
Climate Change Action. Frontiers in Climate, 3.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fclim.2021.686516 footnote80) <a
href="https://www.undp.org/blog/building-integrity-voluntary-carbon-
markets">integrity into carbon markets</a> footnote81) <a
href="https://climatepromise.undp.org/">Climate Promise</a> footnote82)
https://www.ifc.org/en/what-we-do/sector-expertise/blended-finance/how-blended-
finance-works footnote83) https://www.oecd.org/dac/financing-sustainable-
development/blended-finance-
principles/principle-2/Principle_2_Guidance_Note_and_Background.pdf footnote84)
https://www.oecd.org/dac/financing-sustainable-development/blended-finance-
principles/principle-4/Principle_4_Guidance_Note_and_Background.pdf footnote85)
https://www.eib.org/attachments/2022-dfi-bcf-working-group-joint-report.pdf
footnote86) https://www.ibm.com/topics/benefits-of-blockchain footnote87)
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S016740481831201X
footnote88) https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/10/9/3067 footnote89) https://jfin-sw
ufe.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s40854-022-00362-
5#:~:text=We%20demonstrate%20that%20digital%20finance,2020). footnote90)
https://news.un.org/en/story/2023/12/1144267 footnote91)
https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-investment-2023/overview-and-key-
findings footnote92) https://economy-
finance.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2023-06/dp187_en_energy%20markets.pdf
footnote93) https://www.fdiintelligence.com/content/news/netzero-needs-more-
than-solar-wind-and-evs-says-iea-83114 footnote94)
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fenvs.2022.909190/full footnote95)
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0378426618301882
footnote96) https://www.iea.org/reports/financing-clean-energy-in-africa
footnote97) https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/electric-power-and-natural-
gas/our-insights/renewable-energy-development-in-a-net-zero-world-disrupted-
supply-chains footnote98)
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S2213138823003223
footnote99) https://www.oecd.org/trade/topics/global-value-chains-and-
trade/documents/clean-energy-supply-chains-OECD-G7-202305.pdf footnote100)
https://www.oecd.org/trade/topics/global-value-chains-and-trade/documents/clean-
energy-supply-chains-OECD-G7-202305.pdf footnote101)
https://ourworldindata.org/energy-production-consumption footnote102)
https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-39066-2_5 footnote103)
https://energy.ec.europa.eu/topics/markets-and-consumers/wholesale-energy-
market/general-market-framework_en footnote104)
https://www.oecd.org/trade/topics/global-value-chains-and-trade/documents/clean-
energy-supply-chains-OECD-G7-202305.pdf footnote105)
https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-86884-0_22 footnote106)
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/electric-power-and-natural-gas/our-
insights/the-trading-opportunity-that-could-create-resilience-in-materials
footnote107) https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/electric-power-and-natural-
gas/our-insights/the-trading-opportunity-that-could-create-resilience-in-
materials footnote108) https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/21/17/5819 footnote109)
https://www.oecd.org/trade/topics/global-value-chains-and-trade/documents/clean-
energy-supply-chains-OECD-G7-202305.pdf footnote110)
https://www.iea.org/news/the-energy-world-is-set-to-change-significantly-
by-2030-based-on-today-s-policy-settings-alone footnote111)
https://www.iea.org/commentaries/what-does-cop28-need-to-do-to-
keep-1-5-c-within-reach-these-are-the-iea-s-five-criteria-for-success
footnote112) https://www.weforum.org/publications/transforming-energy-demand/
footnote113) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.10.103 footnote114) https://dis
covery.ucl.ac.uk/id/eprint/10027710/1/Castagneto%20Gissey_storage_regulation_Ren
SustEnRev_manuscript_rev1_unlinked.pdf footnote115)
https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-investment-2023/overview-and-key-
findings footnote116) https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/ijfe.2610
footnote117) https://www.iea.org/news/the-energy-world-is-set-to-change-
significantly-by-2030-based-on-today-s-policy-settings-alone footnote118)
https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/issues/esg/the-energy-transition/energy-demand-
opportunity.html footnote119) https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&so
urce=web&cd=&ved=2ahUKEwjcg5DXxdSEAxW-EVkFHZZyCnkQFnoECBgQAQ&url=https%3A%2F%2Fw
ww.adb.org%2Fsites%2Fdefault%2Ffiles%2Fpublication%2F879411%2Ffinancing-
sustainable-resilient-infrastructure-
asean3.pdf&usg=AOvVaw35eRXnt6JxJUMi8PHqKRUO&opi=89978449 footnote120)
https://blogs.worldbank.org/ppps/making-greenfield-projects-bankable
footnote121) <a href="https://blogs.worldbank.org/ppps/preparing-bankable-
infrastructure-projects">https://blogs.worldbank.org/ppps/preparing-bankable-
infrastructure-projects</a>; https://blogs.worldbank.org/ppps/making-greenfield-
projects-bankable footnote122) https://www.iea.org/reports/financing-clean-
energy-transitions-in-emerging-and-developing-economies footnote123)
https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2023/04/20/scaling-up-to-phase-
down-financing-energy-transition-in-developing-countries footnote124)
https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2023/04/20/scaling-up-to-phase-
down-financing-energy-transition-in-developing-countries footnote125)
https://www.ifc.org/content/dam/ifc/doc/2023-delta/scaling-up-private-finance-
for-clean-energy-in-edmes-en.pdf footnote126) https://www.iea.org/news/iea-ifc-
joint-report-calls-for-ramping-up-clean-energy-investments-in-emerging-and-
developing-economies footnote127) https://www.iea.org/news/iea-ifc-joint-report-
calls-for-ramping-up-clean-energy-investments-in-emerging-and-developing-
economies footnote128) https://www.iea.org/news/iea-ifc-joint-report-calls-for-
ramping-up-clean-energy-investments-in-emerging-and-developing-economies#
footnote129) https://www.iea.org/news/iea-ifc-joint-report-calls-for-ramping-up-
clean-energy-investments-in-emerging-and-developing-economies footnote130)
https://www.iea.org/news/iea-ifc-joint-report-calls-for-ramping-up-clean-energy-
investments-in-emerging-and-developing-economies footnote131)
https://www.iea.org/news/iea-ifc-joint-report-calls-for-ramping-up-clean-energy-
investments-in-emerging-and-developing-economies footnote132)
https://www.iea.org/news/iea-ifc-joint-report-calls-for-ramping-up-clean-energy-
investments-in-emerging-and-developing-economies footnote133)
https://www.iea.org/news/iea-ifc-joint-report-calls-for-ramping-up-clean-energy-
investments-in-emerging-and-developing-economies footnote134)
https://www.iea.org/news/iea-ifc-joint-report-calls-for-ramping-up-clean-energy-
investments-in-emerging-and-developing-economies footnote135)
https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2023/04/20/scaling-up-to-phase-
down-financing-energy-transition-in-developing-countries footnote136)
https://about.bnef.com/blog/mobilizing-capital-in-and-to-emerging-markets/
footnote137) https://utilitiesone.com/overcoming-technical-challenges-for-
renewable-energy-integration-in-infrastructure footnote138)
https://blogs.worldbank.org/ppps/making-greenfield-projects-bankable
footnote139)
https://www.un.org/ohrlls/sites/www.un.org.ohrlls/files/all_modules.pdf
footnote140) https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy14osti/60230.pdf footnote141)
https://www.aegf.net/home.html footnote142) https://www.munichre.com/en.html
footnote143)     https://www.iisd.org/credit-enhancement-
instruments/institution/african-trade-insurance-agency/ footnote144)
https://www.kfw-entwicklungsbank.de/International-financing/KfW-
Entwicklungsbank/ footnote145) https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-
detail/-/publication/fbd6a371-dbd4-11ec-a534-01aa75ed71a1/language-en
footnote146) https://www.reuters.com/business/finance/hsbc-temasek-launch-debt-
financing-platform-sustainable-infrastructure-2021-09-29/ footnote147)
https://www.reuters.com/business/sustainable-business/adb-announces-funding-
plan-asian-efforts-combat-climate-change-2023-05-02/ endnote1)