 >Graphical user interface, application Description automatically generated<>A
picture containing nature, smoke, spring, steam Description automatically
generated< Sustainable Energy Academy – Module 1 Draft UNDP Sustainable Energy
Hub Module 1: Introduction to Sustainable Energy Systems Transformation Module
Overview This module addresses the dynamic landscape of sustainable energy and
defines and explores the interconnected concepts of sustainable energy with
respect to global challenges such as climate change, fossil fuel dependency and
lock-in, energy poverty, and disparities, as well as opportunities such as local
development, economic growth, and energy security. The module is built around
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), capacity-building and Sustainable
Energy Hub’s (SEH) core pillars of energy access, energy transition, and energy
finance. It also addresses key challenges and opportunities presented by the
Just Transition. The module is crafted to support interactivity and
participation, and encourages engagement and knowledge sharing among
participants. This comprehensive and active learning experience is tailored for
UNDP Country Offices and policymakers to deepen their understanding of
sustainable energy and how to drive positive and transformative change. Module
Learning Objectives After participating in this module, --     Learners will be
able to explain the concept of sustainable energy, principles underpinning its
link with development, and its connection with different renewable energy
technologies and end-user sectors. -- Participants will be able to assess the
interconnectedness of sustainable energy and essential concepts related to these
such as energy security, energy access and decentralized energy systems and be
able to identify challenges and opportunities brought by sustainable energy
transformation. --  Learners will identify sustainable energy's role in
mitigating pressing global challenges, such as energy disparities, environmental
degradation, and climate change. They will also be able to examine the
opportunities brought about through the intersection of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) and the sustainable energy for development pathway. --
Learners will be able to explain UNDP’s Sustainable Energy Hub’s three core
pillars (energy access, energy transition and energy finance) alongside other
UNDP energy agendas such as the Strategic Plan 2022-2025 and Energy Moonshot.
They will be able to apply these core pillars and sustainable energy practices
into the projects through specific regional needs and country priorities for
accelerating energy transition. --  Learners will be prepared for the
Sustainable Energy Academy and other modules, and their alignment with the three
core pillars of the Sustainable Energy Hub. Module 1: Introduction to
Sustainable Energy Systems Transformation      1 Module Overview       1 Module
Learning Objectives    1 I.    Foundations of Sustainable Energy I – the link to
development and underpinning principles       2 A.    Defining Sustainable
Energy     2 B.    Renewable energy sources and the link to development    6
From Biomass to Progress: The Development Nexus in Bioenergy Solutions        6
Solar Solutions as a Catalyst for Sustainable Development     8 Geothermal
Energy: Navigating Challenges and Opportunities for Development    11
Hydropower: Synchronizing Hydro Energy with Development Goals        13 Wind
Power’s Role in Sustainable Development, Challenges and Opportunities   15
Emerging Renewable Energy System: Ocean Energy       16 Renewable Energy
Technologies and Innovations        16 C.   Connecting End-Use Sectors with
Sustainable Energy for Development      17 Urban Sustainability and Energy-
Efficient Buildings  17 Cultivating the Future through Sustainable Agriculture
19 Powering the Sustainable Industries  20 Navigating Sustainable Transport
21 D.   Principles underpinning Sustainable Energy for Development      24
Access to clean, affordable and reliable electricity 24 Clean Cooking Solutions
25 Energy Finance and Market Development        26 Job employment for a green
transition        29 Social Protection    31 Gender Equality in a just energy
transition  32 Water, Food and Energy Nexus 33 II.  Foundations of Sustainable
Energy II – pressing global challenges and energy transition opportunities   34
A.   The Global Urgency of Sustainable Energy 34 Addressing pressing global
challenges       35 The link between threatening climate change effects and
energy dynamics      37 Sustainable energy’s role in climate change mitigation
and energy transition 39 B.   Interconnectedness with Global Issues   41 Energy
as a cross-cutting global issue and nexus approach    41 Fostering energy
security and economic growth        42 Multisectoral impacts and alignment of
sustainable energy    44 C.   Challenges and Opportunities    45 Challenges I –
Energy Inequalities and Multidimensional Energy Poverty       45 Challenges II –
Fossil Fuel Dependency and Lack of Energy Diversification    46 Opportunities I
– Digital and Data for Accelerating Just Energy Transition   47 Opportunities II
– Multi-actor Knowledge Sharing and Co-creating Solutions for Just Energy
Transition        48 III. Navigating the Path to Sustainable Energy: Three
Pillars of the Sustainable Energy Hub  48 A.   Introducing the Sustainable
Energy Hub Framework        49 Exploring Three Pillars of the Sustainable Energy
Hub        49 B.   Energy Moonshot and Catalyzing Change Through Accelerators
49 IV.  Regional Perspective and Country Office Examples        50 A.   Regional
Perspective    50 RBA (Regional Bureau for Africa)     51 RBLAC (Regional Bureau
for Latin America and the Caribbean)  52 RBEC (Regional Bureau for Europe and
CIS)    53 RBAP (Regional Bureau for Asia and the Pacific)      54 RBAS
(Regional Bureau for Arab States)       54 SIDS (Small Island Developing States)
55 B.   Country Office Examples 56 Example 1 – Tunisian Solar Plan      57
Example 2 – The Africa Mini Grid Programme   57 Example 3 – Viet Nam Developing
Domestic Capital Markets     58 Example 4 – Solar for Health 58 Example 5 – The
Energy School for Women in Peru: e-Mujer     59 Example 6 – Joint Initiatives of
UNDP in the partnership with the government of Kazakhstan   59 V.   Overview –
Academy’s Mission and Approaches     60 A.   Academy’s Core Mission  60 B.
Approaches      60 C.   Outline of the modules and its alignment with the SEH
pillars and nexus offer   61 I)   Foundations of Sustainable Energy I – the link
to development and underpinning principles Clearly state that these are
challenges that relate to sustainable energy deployment A)       Defining
Sustainable Energy Module 1 defines sustainable energy as the utilization of
energy sources and technologies that minimize adverse environmental impacts,
promote long-term resource availability, and contribute to social and economic
development. What is Sustainable Energy? Sustainable energy encompasses a broad
spectrum of technologies (e.g., solar and wind power) and practices aiming to
meet energy needs while minimizing environmental impacts, ensuring resource
availability for future generations, and fostering social and economic
development. Why is Sustainable Energy crucial for development? Sustainable
Energy plays an integral role in development by empowering communities with
access to clean and affordable energy. It drives economic growth, improves
education and health services and enhances energy security by diversifying
energy sources and promoting self-resilient communities. What are the
challenges? While sustainable energy holds immense potential, there are
challenges to realizing its full benefits. These challenges include unequal
access to modern energy sources (e.g., clean cooking fuels and electricity)
which creates energy disparities makes it harder to move from conventional
energy sources to sustainable ones. Energy is a key input for all sectors of the
economy including agriculture, transportation, and communications. While energy
has a central role in our lives, it also brings challenges. Energy consumption
is the main contributor to climate change and yet people still mainly rely on
fossil fuels for transport, heating, electricity, and cooking. Even though
access to clean cooking has increased, according to the 2023 Tracking SDG7
Report, there are major regional differences in access and the number of people
who do not have access to clean cooking in Sub-Saharan Africa is increasing.
Recent progress in access to electricity is also not in line with reaching
universal access by 2030. Even though absolute total access to electricity has
grown, it is growing too slow to bridge the gap for people living in poor and
remote regions. Universal access to clean and affordable energy depends on the
deployment of clean renewable energy in electricity, cooking, heating and
transportation. These challenges present a need for the targeted efforts and
actions embodied in SDG7 target areas: ensuring universal access to clean and
affordable energy, access to electricity, access to clean cooking, increasing
renewable energy, improving energy efficiency, enhancing international
cooperation in support of clean energy, and expanding infrastructure for clean
energy. These challenges and opportunities highlight energy’s interconnected
relationship with development. As a fundamental driver of economic growth and
development, energy plays an essential role in shaping countries’ Human
Development Index (HDI) and overall development trajectory. HDI is a measure of
a nation’s overall well-being and development in key dimensions such as physical
security, lifespan, health, education, and standard of living. Each dimension is
assessed by indicators: health is assessed by life expectancy at birth,
education by the average number of years of schooling, and standard of living by
the gross national income per capita (GNI). These three indices can be
aggregated as a compound index, the HDI, which is the geometric mean of each of
the normalized indices. The HDI is a widely used metric for assessing and
measuring the human development of nations and regions and energy consumption is
intricately linked with the HDI. When we examine countries and regions with
varying levels of electricity access, we can observe differences in the HDI as
in Figure 1 below. Figure 1. Per capita energy consumption and Human Development
Index. (Source: UNDP) The graph shows the generally positive correlation between
per capita energy consumption and HDI. Using HDI as a proxy for development
(measured between 0 and 1, where 1 represents the highest level of development),
most countries in the SSA region fall on the lower end of the spectrum. Regions
with limited access to energy, such as Sub-Saharan Africa, face challenges in
achieving higher critical development indicators, resulting in a lower HDI. On
the other hand, developed regions typically have higher access to energy,
leading to better education, health services and outcome, higher income resulted
in higher the HDI scores. The graph also shows disparities between countries in
the same region such as the Arab states indicate varying levels of energy access
and consumption trends. The oil-producing countries of the region like Saudi
Arabia benefit from ample energy sources with a rapid rise in the higher
electricity consumption due to increased economic activity, population growth
and a high consumption rate, while countries like Tunisia and Algeria have
limited access to energy. Asia also shows diverse trends in terms of energy
consumption and electricity access, with countries like Japan having advanced
energy infrastructure and high electricity access exhibit higher HDI scores,
while South Asian countries like India may still face challenges in terms of
energy access resulting in lower HDI. Electricity consumption and access
significantly influence the HDI across diverse regions. UNDP works with
countries to increase access to electricity. To close the gap between countries
with lower HDI scores and those with higher HDI scores, UNDP aims to help 500
million people gain access to clean energy. The role of sustainable energy
becomes even more critical for driving development and overcoming these regional
disparities. Sustainable energy systems provide widespread, affordable and
reliable access to electricity which tend to improve the overall HDI scores due
to better educational, healthcare and income outcomes. Moreover, while
presenting opportunities for overcoming energy disparities, sustainable energy
is a catalyst for improving overall development outcomes globally through
democratization of electricity production. B)    Renewable energy sources and
the link to development Global annual renewable capacity additions increased by
almost 50% in 2023, the fastest growth rate in the past two decades. At COP28,
the global stocktake marked the first-ever decision on fossil fuels as well as a
global agreement to triple renewables capacity and double energy efficiency by
2030, which could cut to 85% of the unabated fossil fuels by 2030. Wind and
solar are projected to grow at I 15-20% annually signaling a transformative
shift in our energy landscape. The global energy mix will be transformed in the
next five years by adding more renewable capacity than has been installed since
the first commercial renewable energy power plant was built more than 100 years
ago. Solar PV and wind will account for 95% of this global renewable expansion
because they have lower generation costs than both fossil and non-fossil fuels.
China will lead in new renewable capacity, accounting for almost 60% of expected
renewables operations globally. Renewable energy sources such as wind, solar and
geothermal can provide access to diversified, clean, affordable and reliable
electricity, helping underpin energy security and energy access for vulnerable
communities. Furthermore, they provide transition opportunities for major end-
use sectors, encouraging sustainable cities, transportation and industry. A new
clean energy economy is emerging as an opportunity, spearheaded by solar PV,
wind turbines, and electric vehicles (EVs), with a notable 40% increase in
investment in clean energy since 2020. Decarbonization requires a transformation
in energy systems away from fossil fuels and toward clean and renewable sources,
that promotes long-term resource availability. These aspects are highly
connected with development as the transition to sustainable energy brings many
opportunities for socioeconomic progress, and economic growth to energy-
efficient practices for interconnected sectors. Ultimately, the interplay
between technology, energy and the attainment of the SDGs extends to
socioeconomic development. While this module explores the interlinkage between
renewable technologies, development and challenges and opportunities, Module 2
will explore further these renewable energy technologies and infrastructure in
detail. 1)  From Biomass to Progress: The Development Nexus in Bioenergy
Solutions Bioenergy, or energy derived from biomass, can be a versatile
renewable source of energy with many feedstocks, technological pathways and end-
uses. Predominant feedstocks include residues from forest harvesting and
processing (e.g., fuelwood, wood chips, sawdust), energy crops, wastes and
residues from the agriculture sector (e.g., paddy straw, rice husk, animal
waste) and the renewable share of municipal solid waste. This feedstock can be
converted through a variety of biological, chemical and thermal processes to
produce electricity, heat, cooling, and transport fuels, as well as materials
and chemicals. The use of biomass for energy can be broadly classified into
traditional and modern bioenergy. Traditional bioenergy typically involves the
direct combustion of biomass such as wood, charcoal, cow dung and crop waste in
inefficient appliances such as open-fired cook stoves. Such use occurs mainly in
developing countries and produces household air pollution that is harmful to
human health, particularly for women and girls who are traditionally tasked with
cooking. Dependence on traditional biomass exposes women and girls to both
physical and psychological health challenges. Biomass collection is a task
traditionally conducted by women and girls, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa,
where access to clean cooking technologies remains a challenge. While engaging
in this fuelwood collection, women are also exposed to gender-based violence and
life-threatening attacks, as well as exposure to wild animals or reptiles. In
some areas where local resources are depleted, gathering fuelwood is leading
women to travel long distances and spend long hours. However, modern sustainable
bioenergy – the use of improved fuels (e.g., sustainably sourced pellets, wood
chips, ethanol, biogas, biomethane, etc.) in modern equipment – can play an
important role in mitigating climate change. Globally, most bioenergy is used
for heat. In 2020, modern accounted for 23.4% of all heat consumption. Bioenergy
and biofuels, represent a pivotal opportunity for development, can help close
the gap in energy access, provide economic growth and energy security while
accelerating global energy transition. Biofuels can provide locally sourced
alternatives to fossil fuels for uses such as heating/cooking, transport fuels
and electricity. While the use of bioenergy and biofuels have many advantages,
such as economic growth and job opportunities from waste utilization, these
technologies need to be implemented carefully and include a focus on
sustainability, local development and societal well-being. Biofuels can also
compete with food production and increase food prices, drive land use change and
increase lifecycle emissions depending on production and transportation methods.
Technological innovations in bioenergy, such as advanced biofuel production and
efficient biomass utilization, can provide pathways to sustainably produced
bioenergy, potentially reducing dependence on imported biofuels and supporting
local development in more remote developing countries and Small Island States.
Sustainable bioenergy solutions can minimize competition between energy and food
systems by creating synergies in water and land use through crop residues. If
done right, they can support food security while contributing to job creation
and improving sustainable livelihood in these areas. Thus policies should
support the development of a sustainable value chain for these resources, along
with an enabling environment for the market to improve energy finance in
developing countries, particularly emerging economies such as Latin America, the
Caribbean Region, Africa and Asia where the greatest potential exists for
biofuels with plentiful local resources and land availability. Supporting the
pathway to local development: Bioethanol in Brazil has reduced dependency on
imported oils Sustainable biofuels (e.g., bioethanol) are an opportunity for
developing countries and Small Island States. One successful implementation of
biofuels can be found in Brazil, which saw market development with policy
measures addressing all parts of the value chain of the ethanol industry. These
policies led to substantial greenhouse gas savings in the transport sector.
Locally sourced fuel ethanol from sugar cane resulted in Brazil becoming a net
exporter of ethanol and reducing Brazil’s dependence on imported oil. Reducing
oil price volatility also supported several sectors linked to industry,
investments in development, innovation, and investment in the agro-industrial
market chain for ethanol production. Brazil’s ethanol industry exemplifies that
sustainable energy resources can be a pathway to local development by enabling
economic and energy diversification and boosting market development and value
chain. 2)    Solar Solutions as a Catalyst for Sustainable Development Driven by
technological innovation and price declines, solar energy is experiencing
unprecedented growth around the world.. Advancements in both solar photovoltaic
(PV) systems and concentrated solar power technologies have enhanced the
efficiency and affordability of solar power. There are two principal forms of
solar energy. First, solar photovoltaic (PV) uses electronic devices, also
called solar cells, to convert sunlight directly into electricity. Solar PV is
modular which allows the same components to scale from powering single homes to
entire cities, which drives down costs. Second, concentrated solar power (CSP)
systems concentrate sunlight directly into high-temperature heat that can be
used to power a steam turbine & generator, much like a coal or nuclear plant.
Gender mainstreaming in solar projects: The case of Morocco’s Solar Energy
Program Gender mainstreaming approach in the project cycle addresses gender gaps
and strengthens the integration of gender considerations throughout the project.
Solar projects can have a role in ensuring gender equality from design phase to
its implementation. One example of this is the case of one of the largest
concentrated solar power (CSP) facilities in the world, the Solar Energy Program
(NOOR) located in Ouarzazate (NOOR Ouarzazate). Not only is it expected to
diversify Morocco’s energy mix, but it also boosts women’s participation in the
energy sector. The program includes various measures undertaken by the
implementing companies to address gender equality during the construction,
maintenance and operation phases of the project. NOOR Ouarzazate was the first
example of holding a participatory consultation process which involved women’s
participation during the consultation and information-sharing processes. To
ensure gender-responsive actions and outcomes in solar projects, the case
presents lessons that could serve as examples for other projects seeking to
create enabling conditions for gender mainstreaming in solar projects, such as:
--        Encourage enabling conditions at the institutional level to promote
gender equality within implementing companies or governmental entities; --
Ensure gender considerations are integrated throughout the project development
process, including policies, participation, and inclusiveness, by conducting
context-specific gender assessments and identifying activities that contribute
to reducing gender gaps; --  Conduct gender assessments in communities located
in project sites during the design phase to identify gender-related risks,
opportunities, constraints, social norms, and power dynamics, and provide
recommendations for gender-responsive project activities; --     Respect and
understand the local context when implementing gender-responsive actions,
acknowledging and working within boundaries of social norms, even in traditional
communities where change may be slow; -- Allocate dedicated funding within
project budgets to support activities promoting gender equality and equity,
ensuring the implementation of gender actions in projects. Solar projects stand
at the forefront of sustainable energy solutions, serving not only as providers
of clean energy but also as catalysts for local development. The installation
and maintenance of solar infrastructure goes beyond powering homes; they create
job opportunities, fostering economic growth and enhancing energy resilience at
the community level. This democratization of electricity production is further
underscored by the remarkable cost reductions in solar technology over the last
decade. The manufacturing cost of solar panels has experienced a staggering
decline, rendering them not only affordable but often the most cost-effective
means of electricity generation. From 2010 to 2020, solar module prices fell by
93%, while the global weighted-average levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) for
utility-scale solar PV saw an 85% reduction during the same period. This cost-
effectiveness has contributed to a surge in new solar PV installations, with a
37% increase in 2022 alone, as Figure 2 shows. Asia, maintaining its regional
dominance, played a pivotal role, contributing 64% of the global added capacity
during this period. >A graph of a bar chart Description automatically generated
with medium confidence< Figure 2. Solar PV Global Capacity, by Country and
Region, 2012-2022. (Source: https://www.ren21.net/wp-
content/uploads/2019/05/GSR-2023_Energy-Supply-Module.pdf) Power generation from
solar PV increased by a record 26% in 2022 vs. 2021. Solar PV accounted for 4.5%
of total global electricity generation, and it remains the third largest
renewable electricity technology behind hydropower and wind. Utility-scale
plants were responsible for about half of global solar PV capacity additions in
2022, followed by distributed capacity in the commercial and industrial (25%)
and residential (23%) segments. Given high fuel and electricity prices in
2021-2022, distributed PV became an increasingly attractive alternative for many
consumers. Utility-scale systems are often the cheapest source of new
electricity generation in most parts of the world. However, building large-scale
installations is becoming increasingly challenging in many countries due to the
lack of suitable sites, land constraints, transmission constraints, and
generally long interconnection queues. Global capacity additions of rooftop
solar PV rose around 54% in 2022, mainly in China, USA, Spain, Australia and
Germany. Today, the number of households with solar PV is about 25 million.
According to the IEA Net Zero Emission Scenarios, this number will increase to
more than 100 million. Rooftop applications with solar PV are already mainstream
and quickly expanding thanks to innovative business models such as net metering
and surplus feed-in-tariffs for prosumers. As households increasingly shift to
electric heat pumps for heating and cooling and electrify their mobility, the
need for local embedded electricity production will increase. Additional new
business models, such as renting or leasing of solar PV systems are opening up
additional opportunities for those that are not able to directly purchase solar
PV systems. Crafting policies that incentivize solar adoption, exploring
innovative financing models, and integrating solar into broader energy
transition strategies become crucial. Solar Energy Mini Grid Technologies
Connecting Rural Communities with Local Development Many people across the world
still face challenges to access electricity, particularly in rural and remote
areas. Solar mini-grid technologies can bridge the gap in electricity access in
rural communities, serving as a transformative link that connects these areas
with local development and enhances overall community resilience by providing
reliable and sustainable electricity. One of these technologies, solar-battery
mini grids (off-grid, stand-alone electricity networks) holds the potential to
provide reliable access to electricity in these rural areas that are not
connected to the central electricity grid. UNDP supports the Africa Mini Grids
Program, an initiative making renewable energy mini-grids commercially viable.
By unlocking opportunities for private investors, it aims to bring the
transformative power of electricity to off-grid communities. These kinds of
partnerships and collaborations introduce us to the intersection of energy,
technology and local development, aiming to bridge the energy access gap where
it is most needed. As such, another initiative, Light-a-Village, introduced an
innovative ‘energy as a service model’, allowing customers to pay only for the
electricity they use and providing instant access to electricity. While these
technologies benefit the environment by replacing fossil fuels, they
simultaneously contribute to achieving multiple Sustainable Development Goals,
through improved access to clean energy (SDG 7), support economic growth and job
creation (SDG 8), enhanced access to education (SDG 4), and promote better
health outcomes (SDG 3). 3)     Geothermal Energy: Navigating Challenges and
Opportunities for Development Geothermal energy, harnessed from the Earth's
internal heat through thermal and pressure differentials in the crust, offers
significant potential for sustainable development. This versatile energy source
can provide direct thermal energy for heating and cooling or be converted into
electricity using steam turbines. In the dynamic landscape of electricity
generation, 2022 saw the introduction of 0.2 GW of new geothermal power
capacity, contributing to a global total of approximately 14.6 GW as shown in
Figure 3. However, this marked a one-third decrease from the additions in 2021
and fell well below the five-year average of 0.5 GW since 2017. Electricity
generation is mainly located close to tectonically active regions where hot
water and/or steam is carried to the Earth’s surface as medium- or high-
temperature resources are needed. A new generation of deep closed loop
geothermal is being developed using technology from directional drilling that
can be employed in all geologies, but it will be some time before it is commonly
available. There are different geothermal technologies with distinct levels of
maturity. Technologies for direct use, such as district heating, geothermal heat
pumps and heating greenhouses, are widely used and can be considered mature. The
technology for electricity generation from hydrothermal reservoirs with
naturally high permeability is also mature and reliable. Figure 3. Electricity
Capacity Trends in Geothermal, 2011-2022. (Source: https://www.irena.org/Energy-
Transition/Technology/Geothermal-energy) Geothermal projects not only contribute
to a clean and continuous energy supply, reducing dependence on fossil fuels but
also play a pivotal role in local development by boosting economic activities,
providing employment for local communities and enhancing energy security at the
community level, which contributes to sustainable development. Investing in
geothermal projects represents opportunities for cost savings in the long run
and promotes energy efficiency as its low cost and ability to operate at high
capacity all year around. This enables countries to supply reliable electricity
and offers opportunities in end-user sectors such as the food industry and
agriculture. Embracing geothermal energy in the agrifood sector opens doors to
opportunities for local development, utilizing its potential to heat greenhouses
and sterilize soil, fostering sustainable food production in regions otherwise
constrained by natural conditions. Geothermal energy for an inclusive growth:
The case of LaGeo in El Salvador Deploying effective Corporate Social
Responsibility (CSR) initiatives in energy projects can promote local
development and women’s participation in the energy sector while supporting
livelihood activities, employment and social infrastructure as well as climate
mitigation and reducing fossil fuel dependency. The case of LaGeo, a geothermal
energy utility in El Salvador, serves as an example of utilizing CSR initiatives
to enhance gender equality and social benefits in the energy sector. LaGeo
project also highlights conservation work, education, and health initiatives to
demonstrate the benefits of geothermal energy in delivering environmental
sustainability and employment. The project establishes CSR policy with the
commitment of ensuring the active participation of local communities in their
local development plans. To address gender equality, local development and
social benefits in geothermal energy projects, the case presents some key
takeaways to be adapt and replicate in other renewable energy projects: --
Large-scale national energy utilities can have an active role in adopting
gender-responsive approaches by integrating and implementing national laws and
principles on gender equality; --      Renewable energy projects can utilize
gender analysis tools to ensure that human resources practices are gender-
responsive and provide benefits to both women and men; --       Renewable energy
projects can introduce innovative approaches to ensure benefit sharing with
neighboring communities, thereby reducing potential social conflicts; --
Gender-responsive CSR activities can bring transformative outcomes by reducing
gender gaps and fostering long-term sustainable and resilient local economic
growth. 4) 5)       Hydropower: Synchronizing Hydro Energy with Development
Goals Hydropower, often called hydroelectric power, is critical in
decarbonization as a renewable energy source that converts the energy of water
moving from higher to lower elevations. As one of the world’s oldest renewable
energy technologies, hydropower's historical applications ranged from irrigation
to powering machines like watermills and textile machines. Over time, in
response to growing energy demands, hydropower plants multiplied in number and
size. Currently, hydropower is the largest source of renewable energy in the
electricity sector, and it is expected to remain the world’s largest source of
renewable energy into the 2030s. According to REN21 Renewables 2023 Global
Status Report, hydropower represented 37% of renewable energy capacity and added
2% of total renewables capacity in 2022. The main types of hydropower
technologies are run-of-river, reservoir (storage hydropower), pumped storage
and in-stream technology. Run-of-river hydropower plants produce electricity
from the motion of river water. As a result, electricity production depends on
precipitation and runoff and shows substantial seasonal variations .
Installations of these types of hydropower plants are relatively cost-effective
and overall, less environmental impact than other similar-sized hydropower
plants. In storage hydropower, hydropower plants combined with a reservoir store
water for later consumption and reduce dependence on variability of flows. As an
energy storage technology, pumped storage plants pump water from a lower
reservoir into a higher reservoir and provide large scale energy storage
benefits. Another hydropower technology, in-stream technology can provide usage
of existing facilities by deployment of small turbines or hydrokinetic turbines.
Despite its vital contributions to the energy landscape, hydropower faces
multifaceted challenges, urging a strategic policy-centered approach. These
challenges include multi sector needs for water (especially agriculture and
flood control) the imperative to ensure sustainability and climate resilience,
address aging fleets with associated investment needs, adapt operation and
maintenance practices to modern power system requirements, and the overhauling
of outdated market structures and business models that hinder the recognition of
hydropower's full spectrum of services. The top four countries in hydropower
generation, China, Brazil, Canada and the United States, produced half of global
hydropower generation in 2022, 4,43p TWh. China, as with solar PV and wind
power, dominated the global hydropower market while investing in emerging and
developing countries. However, fluctuating water levels, changes in river flows,
and increasing droughts related to climate change have raised concerns regarding
the electricity capacity of hydropower. Collaborative efforts between financing
institutions and governments become paramount to overcoming local risks,
bridging financial gaps, and fostering much-needed investment in developing
regions and within these challenges lie opportunities for modernization,
enabling hydropower plants to continue delivering critical services to global
power systems. There is a need to ensure sustainable standards for all
hydropower technologies and technology transfer to provide energy access and
efficiency. Its adaptability from small-scale hydro systems to large hydropower
plants brings further opportunities for energy access for all. Finally, a hybrid
of solar photovoltaic and hydropower is emerging quickly, floating solar PV on
hydroelectric reservoirs. The solar adds to the dams total capacity, saves water
for firm electricity needs, while the solar is made more efficient by cooling
from the reservoir while taking advantage of access to the existing high voltage
transmission. Floating solar PV for storage reservoirs is likely to become
standard in the coming decade, especially in the tropics due to the lack of
concern about reservoir icing, snow, etc. 6) Wind Power’s Role in Sustainable
Development, Challenges and Opportunities Wind energy is a dynamic and
sustainable energy source that produces electricity by harnessing the kinetic
energy of wind by using large wind turbines located on land (onshore) or in a
sea and freshwater (offshore). Wind power has experienced rapid growth and
innovation in recent years, making it one of the key technologies of
decarbonization and sustainable energy transition. According to IRENA data,
global installed capacity for wind generation both onshore and offshore had
jumped from 7.5 GW in 1997 to some 733 GW by 2018 and both on and offshore wind
generation technologies have great potential for deployment and improvement
globally. As Figure 4 indicates, electricity capacity in both onshore and
offshore wind energy has quadrupled in the last decade. Figure 4. Electricity
Capacity Trends in Wind Energy, 2011-2022. (Source:
https://www.irena.org/Energy-Transition/Technology/Wind-energy) The adaptability
of wind power provides a versatile solution for diverse communities as its
scalability brings decentralization of the energy system by providing
electricity in remote or underserved areas. It can also provide a balancing
source of energy for local solar PV, reducing the need for balancing fossil
generation and energy storage. Beyond larger-scale modern wind turbines and
large wind farms, smaller-scale wind turbines for electricity supply reduce the
cost of larger-scale turbines and can represent opportunities for areas that do
not have central access to electricity and provide electricity services for
communities and households in need. The energy transition can be accelerated by
prioritizing policies that encourage innovation, address regulatory frameworks,
and facilitate community engagement to unlock the full potential of wind power
in driving local development and contributing broader sustainable development
goals. The industry also focuses on making wind energy fully sustainable through
technologies such as recycled blades, reduction of the need for rare earths, and
reducing its life cycle impacts and cost-effectiveness through grid integration
and manufacturing processes to remain competitive in the renewables market. 7)
Emerging Renewable Energy System: Ocean Energy Ocean energy encompasses
technologies that capture and convert the energy derived from the kinetic and
thermal energy of oceans, seawater, waves and currents to produce electricity or
heat and represents the smallest share of the renewable energy market. These
energy systems are still developing, and tidal stream and wave power devices
have been the focus of these efforts. As a renewable energy source, ocean power
holds a vast potential which covers over 70% of Earth’s surface and can provide
reliable and consistent access to energy. In 2022, five tidal stream devices
(2.7 MW) were deployed, and ocean power continued to be part of
commercialization efforts, especially concentrated in Europe. However, there are
increasing research and development (R&D) programmes in other regions,
especially in Canada, the United States and China. Ocean power is not yet
competitive in the renewable energy market and there is a need for R&D and
technological advancements. Therefore, the sector depends on public investment
and funding and consists of challenges to overcome such as the marine
environment, high initial costs and limited infrastructure. In recent years,
innovators and entrepreneurs have been a part of the wave of advancements in
marine energy, leveraging the vast potential of ocean resources to address
global energy demands, particularly the transformative possibilities within the
women-led initiatives driving innovation in the ocean energy sector. Ultimately,
ocean energy can be transformative in Small Island Developing States (SIDS), to
facilitate sustainable use of ocean ecosystem. Promoting emerging innovation,
ocean-based energy, into the market brings benefits to the blue economy approach
and overall development goals in SIDS by enhancing economic diversification. 8)
Renewable Energy Technologies and Innovations While renewable energy innovations
and technologies bring new opportunities for the environment, society and
future, they also define new challenges to overcome to enable decarbonization
and just transition. One of them is that critical raw materials such as cobalt,
lithium and copper are essential components for renewable energy technologies
and electric vehicles. According to the IEA scenario, the demand for critical
raw materials will grow by three and a half times by 2030. This demand growth
represents many opportunities and challenges across the world for trading,
economy, geopolitics and partnership, especially in areas where these critical
minerals are concentrated such as Africa. While Africa carries many
opportunities for economic growth and development of the region’s richness with
a variety of mineral resources, there are some challenges bringing through
supply risks, affordability and equitable exploitation of critical materials.
Another technology, carbon capture and storage (CCS) technologies also present
opportunities and challenges in the decarbonization process. While the
technology of carbon capture aims to capture CO2 for decarbonization, it does
not capture all CO2 and still emits a certain amount of carbon. These
technologies also have high costs which bring accessibility challenges for CCS
technology. Bringing new innovations and technologies by utilizing renewable
energy sources amplifies socioeconomic opportunities in the job market, ensuring
gender equality and enhancing education and health care by leaving no one
behind. With this intersection of energy, technology and development, renewable
energy systems transformations provide catalysts for sustainable development
with alignment three principles of sustainability – environmental stewardship,
economic viability, and social equity. C)        Connecting End-Use Sectors with
Sustainable Energy for Development 9)   Urban Sustainability and Energy-
Efficient Buildings Image: Left – iStock/metamorworks Cities and buildings
represent a critical challenge in today’s rapidly urbanizing world. The primary
issue lies in the ever-increasing surge in energy demand within urban areas,
especially for electricity, which not only places a strain on finite resources
but also exerts substantial and concerning adverse effects on greenhouse gas
emissions and exacerbates climate change issues. In 2021, energy consumption in
buildings amounted to around 30% of the world’s total final energy consumption.
Within this context, buildings and urban areas emerge as prominent contributors
to both energy usage and emissions, particularly due to energy-intensive needs
for heating, cooling, lighting and powering appliances. Approximately 75% of the
total energy consumption within buildings can be attributed to the essential
functions of space and water heating, while the remaining 25% is allocated to
powering appliances, lighting and other electricity-based services except
heating and cooling. As urbanization continues to accelerate and the global
population expands, accompanied by a growing energy demand, these figures
illustrate the substantial accumulation of greenhouse gas emissions. This
underscores the pressing need for sustainable energy practices, aligning with
the goals of making cities inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable in SDG 11.
According to the REN21 Renewables 2023 Global Status Report, renewables
accounted for 15.5% of the total final energy consumption in buildings in 2020.
Nonetheless, as we assess the expanding presence of renewables across the
broader energy landscape, the growth rate of renewable adoption within buildings
appears at a comparatively slower pace. Relying on fossil fuels for electricity
generation in buildings represents formidable challenges, affecting both
accessibility and affordability of reliable energy supply as urban areas require
undisrupted energy supply by consuming 75% of global primary energy. Therefore,
it is crucial for cities to embrace sustainable practices as a strategic
approach to effectively mitigate these multifaceted challenges. Urban areas are
characterized by their high population densities, intricate transport systems
and the concentration of commercial and industrial activities, which are often
sources of increasing emissions and air pollution. Therefore, urban
sustainability emerges as a pivotal concept for fostering long-term urban
viability, simultaneously curbing adverse environmental impacts by enhancing the
economic, social and environmental fabric of these urban places. Through the
emphasis on sustainable energy practices as the cornerstone of urban development
we create a foundation for well-being and prosperity for current residents and
future generations. Sustainable practices present diverse opportunities, from
transitioning to low-carbon technologies on the supply side to providing
efficient distribution of infrastructure and lowering consumption on the end-
user side. These comprehensive strategies encompass: land use planning for
thriving, secure cities based on transit, walking and cycling; building designs
that include energy efficiency, passive cooling and heating, and low GHG
materials; and on site and utility based renewable energy offer synergistic
opportunities for the decarbonization of urban places, which hold the potential
to significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions and air pollution, especially
in the face of the rapid urbanization. Moreover, as energy is related to income
generation, its distribution needs to be more equitable and inclusive to promote
universal development, especially for poorer populations in urban areas.
According to the Sustainable Development Goals Report 2023, around 1.1 billion
people currently live in slum or slum-like conditions, with sprawl and limited
public open places affecting living conditions. Increasing population growth and
rapid urbanization put pressure on energy supply systems, and risk supply
disruption and high upfront costs. Renewable energy technologies, and
particularly decentralized systems such as smart grids, can provide a solution
to balance variable power generation and end user needs, access to affordable
and reliable electricity and clean cooking in underserved communities. While
renewable technologies and smart grids optimize energy use, pairing with smart
appliances, and energy-efficient buildings and households within the end user
side, policymakers need to formulate policies to incentivize sustainable urban
energy systems, and sustainable building practices, promote renewable energy
adoption and provide financial incentives for energy-efficient buildings to
facilitate sustainable energy transition in the sector. Cities can have a role
in setting strong standards and policies for sustainable energy development.
Moreover, a collaboration between diverse stakeholders from local and
international partners can enable knowledge and capacity building in local
companies to enhance their market reach. Governments, particularly developing
countries, can develop sustainable energy systems through public-private
partnerships to facilitate decarbonization and infrastructure and create an
enabling environment for use of sustainable energy by formulating specific
legislations and tax systems. For changing urban landscape into sustainable
practices, local authorities such as municipalities can also have a key role in
tailoring policies to specific needs and priorities for the cities to foster a
more sustainable and resilient urban spaces. Digital and data transformation can
also be transformative to develop ‘smart cities’ incorporating digital solutions
to create sustainable urban landscapes. Electrification is especially key to the
decarbonization process, enabled by digital and smart technologies (e.g.,
e-payments, smart urban mobility, and digital public services) which can have a
crucial role to facilitate this transformation in cities. 10)      Cultivating
the Future through Sustainable Agriculture The agriculture sector as the
cornerstone of food production relies on energy for irrigation, machinery and
transportation. In 2022, agriculture and forestry sectors accounted for 3% of
total final energy consumption across the world, and the fisheries sector was
responsible for around 0.07%. Meanwhile, the fisheries sector is one of the most
energy-intensive sectors by relying almost entirely on fossil fuels, the share
of renewables only represented 15.4% of the agricultural sector in 2020.
Significant challenges lie in the adverse environmental impacts of traditional
farming activities, such as soil degradation, water pollution, food security and
high energy consumption by dependence on fossil fuels. A sustainable energy
transition in the agriculture sector is at the forefront of addressing
multifaceted challenges while offering opportunities for economic and
environmental development alongside mitigating the sector’s environmental
impact, enhancing food security and promoting economic growth in rural areas.
Therefore, there is a need to recognize the urgency of transitioning towards
sustainable agricultural practices. Sustainable developments in the sector such
as agroecological approaches, digital agriculture and organic farming reveal the
potential benefits for policymakers to take action to accelerate the energy
transition by promoting soil health, reducing chemical inputs and enhancing
resource efficiency while minimizing the negative environmental impact of
energy-intensive activities within the agriculture sector. Formulating policies
that incentivize these practices, promote sustainable land management and
support local farming, has a pivotal role in achieving both food security and
environmental sustainability. >Source: UNDP< Sustainable technological
developments in the sector can be a driver to reducing costs, saving energy and
increasing access to energy for farmers and fishers. Decarbonization of the
agricultural sector is highly linked with development by reducing lack of access
to reliable energy sources in rural areas. For example, off-grid renewable
cooling systems help reduce food waste with efficient post-harvest practices and
expand market value of the products and income for farmers. As the agriculture
sector heavily depends on water, there is also a need for energy-efficient
irrigation systems to reduce water waste and renewable energy sources such as
solar powered water pumps, which provide huge potential for making irrigation
more sustainable, cost-effective and reliable. There is also increasing
digitalization within the agriculture sector via technologies to assist farmers,
generally through precision agriculture technologies (e.g. through targeted and
timed application of fertilizer, with areas to fertilize assessed by drones).
These technologies need to be made more accessible to smallholders and
producers, the majority of whom are women and may lack the technical knowledge
and financial resources to invest in them. In the case of Cambodia’s rural
electrification, solar water pumping technologies can create new opportunities
for women and small holder farmers. Scaling up solar water pumping not only cuts
operation costs but also opens doors to other productive solar energy uses,
benefiting smallholder farmers. Prioritizing de-risking private investments in
these systems is crucial for local development, offering a dual solution to
climate change and mitigate its impact on vulnerable farmers while improving
sustainable livelihoods. 11) Powering Sustainable Industries Industries are
major energy consumers, responsible for 33% of global total final energy
consumption, producing about 26% of direct CO2 emissions and 33 % of all
emissions including purchased heat and electricity.. Moreover, 83.2% of global
total final energy consumption was generated through fossil fuels in 2020. There
is increasing demand for industrial goods, especially energy-intensive sectors
such as iron, steel and chemicals. With the rising demand and energy consumption
in the sector, transitioning industries into sustainable entities is crucial for
achieving development and economic growth while mitigating environmental
impacts. This offers both challenges and opportunities for policymakers. The
main challenge is reconciling economic growth with environmental sustainability,
given that industries are often energy and GHG intensive. There is a need to
analyze the balance between fostering sustainability and reducing the
environmental impact of energy consumption in manufacturing processes, utilizing
digital innovations to facilitate knowledge transfer and technology adoption.
These innovations can enable integration of clean production methods, green
manufacturing, circular economy practices and the adoption of renewable energy
systems, which present opportunities for sustainable industries. Formulating
policies that incentivize green technology adoption, regulate emissions and
support research and development can catalyze the shift towards sustainability
and foster market development within the sector. Renewables play a key role in
ensuring secure, reliable and affordable energy that is needed to power
industries, especially in developing countries and remote areas. Policies
focused on local development such as investments in green job training and the
promotion of small-scale sustainable industries can both bring benefits from
economic growth and reduce emissions while bolstering energy security and
building economic resilience. Renewable energy technologies can help improve
energy security for industry, reducing energy costs and brownouts. Most
companies have been announcing net zero commitments, but there is still a lack
of substantiated efforts to achieve net zero emissions. More than one-third of
the world’s publicly traded companies had announced net zero commitments as of
2022, while 65% of companies’ targets have not yet met reporting standards.
Therefore, environmental compliance and standards are essential to maintaining
operations of net-zero commitments. 12)       Navigating Sustainable Transport
The transport sector represents a significant portion of energy use, around a
third of total end use energy demand . The sector has a close link with economic
growth and globalization as it ties producers and consumers and is a vital part
of the supply chain of goods and services. Even though there is increasing
demand for renewable electricity and biofuels, transportation still relies on
oil products for nearly 91% of its final energy, down only 3.5 percentage points
from the early 1970s. The transport sector has the smallest share of renewable
energy in the total energy consumption compared to buildings, industry and
agriculture. The sector remains heavily dependent on oil and gas and contributes
to GHG emissions. There are also challenges in the sector in terms of efficiency
such as areas of aviation, trucks and passenger road transport. Therefore,
sustainable energy systems transformation has a key role in overcoming
challenges by industry and country-specific solutions. Images: Pexels One
intersecting area of energy-efficiency solutions is urban planning, which can
provide sustainable transportation patterns by creating walkable and compact
cities and bike roads in urban areas. Another key element in decarbonization of
transportation is the transition to electric vehicles (EVs), which reduces the
reliance on fossil fuels and creates job opportunities in the clean energy
sector. As following Figure 5 shows, electric car sales had increased almost 20
times compared to the years of 2016 and 2023. Transition to EVs does not only
reduce emissions but also decrease air pollution and enhance well-being and
livable cities. Figure 5. Electric car sales, 2016-2023. (Source:
https://www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/charts/electric-car-sales-2016-2023)
Creating the ecosystem for supporting sustainable livelihoods with decentralized
energy systems Access to affordable, modern and reliable energy services is
essential for sustainable livelihoods and supporting socio-economic development.
There is a strong link between energy access, income-generating livelihood
activities and contributing to various SDGs. Decentralized renewable energy
(stand-alone systems and mini grids) solutions have a promising role in
delivering global energy access and have grown rapidly in recent years by
offering opportunities to increase inclusive and reliable electricity access and
meeting the energy needs of diverse livelihoods with tailored delivery models.
Decentralized energy systems have modular systems that allow them to be scaled
down to the level of individual needs and the size of enterprises. These energy
systems are generated with locally available energy resources which enhance
energy security via a more resilient value chain. An example of decentralized
energy systems for supporting sustainable livelihoods is the UNDP and
Sustainable Energy Hub’s flagship initiative the Africa Mini Grids Program which
supports clean energy access by increasing financial viability and scaling up
commercial investments with a focus on cost-efficient innovative business
models. Creating the ecosystem for supporting long-term resilient and
sustainable livelihoods requires an inclusive approach to creating solutions
based on local conditions and country priorities while supporting local
entrepreneurship and innovations which decentralized energy systems bring as
opportunities. Decentralized energy systems are interlinked with employment and
income generation alongside human capital development such as access to
education and health services and focusing on end users’ needs. Enabling the
ecosystem for a sustainable livelihood encompasses access to these needs as well
as essential components such as technology, financing, forward and backward
market linkages and market access, training and capacity building and policies
to de-risking mechanisms, incentives for manufacturers and cross-sectoral
cooperations. There are interconnections between these components. For instance,
de-risking policies enable finance mechanisms and local investments, and
accessible efficient technological appliances influence market access and an
undisrupted supply chain. Creating this interlinked ecosystem for sustainable
livelihoods is also related to cross-cutting elements such as inclusive
partnerships with diverse stakeholders, including knowledge management across
local communities. Inclusive partnerships (e.g., co-operatives, community
organizations and other organizations for farmers and producers) are vital for
developing market access for local enterprises, for instance partnering with
solar irrigation systems providers. As the transition to sustainable energy
systems requires a knowledge-intensive process, knowledge management through
sharing challenges and solutions and collaborations for the transfer of
knowledge are critical steps to creating a sustainable livelihood ecosystem and
decentralized energy systems hold a promise to meet specific needs and
priorities of local communities in developing countries by knowledge gathering
and sharing. Decentralized energy systems also support sustainable livelihoods
by including a gender responsive approach through empowering women’s
participation in the energy value chain from financing to training. This also
includes pre-identifying livelihoods opportunities for women, supporting the
development of these livelihoods and powering women-owned business through
decentralized energy systems. D)    Principles underpinning Sustainable Energy
for Development As sustainable energy goes beyond meeting energy needs by
creating jobs, fostering energy access and empowering societies, this subchapter
expands on the concept of sustainability and emphasizes the alignment of
sustainable energy with the principles of environmental stewardship, economic
viability, and social equity. With the connection of sustainability and
development, sustainable energy emerges as a key point in achieving multifaceted
goals for addressing challenges and rising inequalities globally. Beyond its
fundamental function of meeting energy demand, sustainable energy presents a
transformative approach across communities and aligns with diverse dimensions of
sustainability. The UN’s 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development emphasizes
three dimensions of sustainable development: economic, social and environmental.
This holistic approach challenges the conventional concept of energy as a
commodity. Efforts towards sustainable energy not only drive development but
also minimize adverse environmental impacts as well as protecting biodiversity
and the health of land and oceans. It also stimulates innovation, investment and
employment stimulating innovation, driving investments and generating employment
opportunities for acting towards sustainable economic growth and development.
Sustainable energy for development helps ensure energy access for all and
ensures that communities, especially vulnerable ones, shape their future without
having the burden of adverse environmental impact. 13)   Access to clean,
affordable and reliable electricity Progress is not on track to reach universal
electricity access by 2030. Globally, access to electricity grew by an annual
average of 0.7 percentage points between 2010 and 2021, rising from 84 percent
of the world’s population to 91 percent. The number of people without
electricity almost halved during the period, from 1.1 billion in 2010 to 675
million in 2021. The pace of annual growth slowed during 2019–21 to 0.6
percentage points. SDG7 is targeted to ensure access to reliable, affordable
clean sustainable energy for all. Access to clean, affordable and reliable
electricity is a fundamental driver of development by improving living
standards, fostering economic growth, and enhancing education and healthcare
services. It addresses three dimensions of sustainable energy for development
and brings together many opportunities for local development. As Module 1 has
been discussing, sustainable energy technologies provide diverse solutions to
overcome challenges specific to regions, countries and communities by
decentralizing and democratizing energy production. Sustainable energy solutions
provide affordable and clean electric access while mitigating environmental
impact, which creates a resilient local environment, protecting natural
resources and ecosystems. Beyond the relation with the environmental aspect of
sustainable energy for development, clean electricity access is crucial to
socio-economic development. Reliable and affordable electricity has a vital role
in enhancing education quality, providing educational tools, powering
educational institutions and empowering a skilled workforce, e.g., through
access to the internet and other educational resources Electricity access also
improves healthcare services by enabling affordable and reliable electricity for
health institutions such as in medical equipment, healthcare services and
refrigerators for medicine and vaccines. Access to electricity can also enhance
community services such as libraries and public facilities which are closely
tied with local development by creating togetherness, social cohesion, and
providing access to cultural services. Energy access also enables local
development by empowering economic productivity, agriculture development, and
income generation. Access to electricity has a direct relation with economic
development, as a driver for economic growth by supporting industries,
businesses and local enterprises and enabling growth in the local economy.
Sustainable energy technologies, particularly solar PV, are key to closing the
energy access gap. With an expected 8 300 TWh annual solar PV generation in
2030, it is a game-changer for the regions that are unelectrified and not
connected with central grid systems. A decentralized renewable energy system can
generate income for local communities and improve agricultural activities
through sustainable irrigation systems and decreasing food waste. While
electricity access is crucial for local development, partnering with indigenous
communities and engaging with traditional knowledge have a significant role in
local development. Indigenous communities possess deeply connected local
knowledge from generations about sustainable land use, natural resource
management and disaster management , which can aid in creating climate resilient
communities and incorporation of sustainable practices in agriculture and local
production. 14)   Clean Cooking Solutions While the portion of the global
population lacking access to clean cooking fell from 2.9 billion in 2010 to 2.3
billion in 2021, the goal of universal access by 2030 remains off track.. Clean
cooking refers to sustainable fuels and modern cooking technologies that enable
people to cook and heat their home in a way that is not harmful to their health
and limits the immediate impacts on their environment. Clean cooking access is
getting more pronounced in international collaboration. As such at COP28 in
December 2023, the launch of the Global Electric Cooking Coalition (GeCCo￼,
exemplifies the need to promote higher-tier cooking transitions by providing
collaborative efforts, leadership, integration, knowledge, and funding that is
specific to addressing scaling up electric cooking. If current trends continue,
almost six out of ten people without access to clean cooking in 2030 would
reside in Sub-Saharan Africa. Besides, the lack of access to clean cooking in
the poorest communities, remote communities that are not part of the national
energy grid in middle-income countries are also affected by the lack of clean
cooking such as India where 32% of the population does not have access to clean
cooking. Lack of access to clean cooking challenges developmental pathways in
these countries and communities, and disproportionately impacts women and
children while bringing significant health, environmental and social costs.
Indoor pollution generated by a lack of clean cooking or heating causes 3.8
million premature deaths every year. While clean cooking reduces indoor
pollution and improves health outcomes, it is also time-efficient, unlike
traditional cooking methods that require collecting fuels for cooking. Women
spend up to 18 hours a week collecting fuels for cooking, while children have to
skip school to help them. Access to clean cooking reduce this time consume while
empowering women and girls to invest their time for education and is an integral
part of achieving several sustainable development goals such as SDG 3 (Good
Health and Wellbeing), SDG 5 (Gender Equality) and SDG 7 (Affordable and Clean
Energy) as an essential component for local development. Access to clean
cooking, at the top of the UNDP’s climate and energy agenda, provides a bridge
between sustainable energy and development while addressing multiple dimensions
of sustainability such as gender equality, environmental sustainability and
economic growth. Improving access to clean cooking requires holistic and
multifaceted approaches involving innovative market solutions, engagement of the
private sector and putting people’s needs on focus. 15)      Energy Finance and
Market Development Financing the energy transition is a crucial part of
navigating decarbonization and is a capital-intensive process required for
unlocking climate investments. While closing the gap in energy financing
underscores the urgency for new, additional, and grant-based funds, the energy
transition adds new value into market development. The transformative impact of
off-grid solar products has reverberated across the economic landscape,
supporting approximately 2.6 million small and micro enterprises in 2021.
Ownership of off-grid lighting products empowered 4.9 million individuals to
elevate their economic activity, creating a symbiotic relationship between the
adoption of renewable energy technologies, market development, and enhanced
economic engagement at the local level. The cumulative impact of off-grid solar
products has contributed to an estimated USD 7 billion in additional income
generation since 2010. Sustainable energy technologies hold the promise of
fostering economic growth across enterprises of all sizes and driving market
development. The link between sustainable energy and local development is
strengthened as affordable and clean electricity becomes accessible through
decentralized renewable energy technologies such as small solar grids. This is
particularly impactful in areas where communities face challenges with
unreliable electricity and lack access to central energy systems, predominantly
in rural and remote regions. The transition to sustainable energy not only
addresses these challenges but also serves as a dependable and cost-effective
energy source, facilitating economic growth, stimulating job creation, and
fostering income generation within local markets. As sustainable energy
continues to broaden existing market opportunities, it acts as a catalyst for
the emergence of new markets. The surge in demand for clean technologies and
services spans a spectrum, encompassing manufacturing, distribution,
innovations, energy storage, and grid technologies. Furthermore, the volatile
nature of fossil fuel prices and escalating concerns regarding energy security
act as catalysts, propelling a growing demand for solar PV and wind power
solutions. By 2024, manufacturing all solar PVs is expected to more than double
up to 1,000 GW. The rapidly increasing market for sustainable energy
technologies stimulates innovations, attracts investments and creates a
competitive market. However, amidst this dynamism, challenges within the
renewable energy market become apparent, notably in the widening gap between
advanced economies and developing countries and the disproportionate
distribution of energy investments. Global renewable energy investments are not
equally distributed. China overall accounted for 55% of global renewable energy
investments followed by Europe, Asia-Oceania (except China and India) and the
United States. All other world regions only account for 4% of global renewable
energy investments. This disparity underscores the need for strategic
interventions and collaborative efforts to ensure a more equitable global
distribution of renewable energy investments. Addressing the challenges within
the global financing gap necessitates a strategic role for public finance in
attracting and leveraging private sector investments for renewable energy
technologies across diverse regions. The private sector provides 75% of the
total global investments in renewable energy between 2013-2020. However, the
private capital flow tends to be directed towards developed markets in countries
that have lower risk or have effective risk mitigation facilities. While the
private capital flow creates inequality in the market, especially in underserved
communities, it also generates much higher costs when it does direct capital
flow to higher-risk areas. Scaling up investment in renewable energy requires
enabling market development through financing tools that reduce risks and
barriers in front of the development such as through risk assessment and
mitigating solutions such as derisking measures in renewable energy projects,
use of insurance products and securitization to create a reliable investing
atmosphere for renewable technologies and mobilize additional public-private
investments in various areas. Scaling up blended finance models is crucial for
attracting more private investments through national development banks (NDBs)
and large financial institutions (LFIs) integrate sustainable energy finance
into their operations for driving decarbonization and a just energy transition.
Multi-stakeholder collaborations are also another essential tool for renewable
energy investments in developing markets such as policy regulations for
financial incentives to facilitate capital mobilization from the private sector
into the renewables market. As a supply side of energy finance, phasing out
fossil fuels in energy finance can also enhance the demand side of scaling up
renewable energy technologies into the energy market mix in the countries. For
instance, a shift away from fossil fuel projects in the insurance sector can
potentially instill hesitancy among financial institutions, leading to a reduced
willingness to direct their investments towards fossil fuel projects as the risk
capacity is not shared by risk mitigating market tools. Moreover, multi-
stakeholder collaboration in market development can enable capital flow from
institutional investors such as sovereign wealth funds, endowments, and
insurance companies, into renewable energy markets. In conclusion, sustainable
energy, market development and economic growth interconnect and reinforce each
other to achieve SDGs and accelerate drivers behind the development with
policies that turn the situation of investing low risk areas into invert and
creating inclusive environment for market development. On the other hand, cross-
sectoral transformation into sustainable practices can enhance the value chain
of diverse sectors while improving the market development. Explore the Dynamic
Landscape of Energy Finance Instruments for Sustainable Development This
information box, which sets the stage for a deeper exploration in Module 7,
delves into some energy financing concepts to scale up green investments and
decarbonization. To start with Green Bonds are fixed-income securities and
innovative capital-market instruments to raise capital to fund projects that
have a clear environmental benefit, such as renewable energy, energy efficiency,
clean transportation, and green buildings. The green bond market has been
growing rapidly over the past decade. In this context, policy makers can ensure
the adaptation of green bond standards and provision of enabling policies to
scale up renewables market. There is also an emerging theme within the market
called Blue Bonds for ocean-related assets and projects to achieve sustainable
development goals. Even green bonds cover few industry sectors in ocean, blue
bonds can recognize more diverse ocean-based industries and create market
awareness for the special nature of ocean industries, risks and opportunities.
Derisking renewable energy projects and creating bankable projects are crucial
to attract more private capital into the clean market. Sovereign guarantees are
one of the risk mitigating instruments to make renewables bankable. A sovereign
guarantee is a government’s commitment to cover payments in case of the primary
obligor defaults. In renewables context, this is important for attracting
investors by mitigating the risk for them in case of any non-payment or non-
performance. Carbon Credits are used by companies to compensate for their carbon
emissions, by either adhering to carbon emission allowances or contributing to
sustainable projects. More than 95 percent of carbon credits on the market
currently represent emissions mitigation and reducing activities (e.g.,
renewable energy installation, clean cooking stoves, or e-mobility credits),
while remaining 5 percent are carbon removal offsets (e.g., taking the carbon
out of the system). While carbon financing can address energy asymmetries, there
are some challenges in the market related to its complexity, time taking and
costly analysis work. 16)     Job employment for a green transition Sustainable
energy transition also presents a transformative surge in employment within the
energy sector. Investing USD 1 million in renewables creates nearly three times
as many jobs as investing the same amount in fossil fuels. A shift to low-
carbon, resilient economies could create over 65 million net new jobs globally
by 2030. As numbers show, renewables have a significant effect on job creation.
The following Figure 6 shows the evolution of job employment in renewable energy
technologies. >A graph of different colored bars Description automatically
generated with medium confidence< Figure 6. Evolution of global renewable energy
employment by technology, 2012-2021. (Source: https://www.irena.org/-
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2022/Sep/IRENA_Renewable_energy_and_jobs_2
022.pdf) According to the figure, solar PVs have been continuing to generate the
most job employment in the last decade, followed by bioenergy. Renewables expand
the existing job market while adding new jobs from manufacturing to research and
development, creating a diverse range of skilled and unskilled job employment.
Green jobs also bring opportunities for decent working conditions such as a less
hazardous work environment compared to jobs in conventional energy sectors.
Under IRENA's 1.5°C Scenario, the renewable energy sector employment is expected
to triple from 2021 to around 40 million jobs globally by 2050, particularly
solar energy jobs will constitute about 45% of the total renewable energy jobs.
However, the distribution of these jobs across regions remains uneven,
emphasizing the need to address regional socioeconomic disparities, bridging
skill gaps and ensuring these opportunities are equitably distributed among
diverse populations, including women and youth. “Renewable energy technologies
are creating new jobs, however it is not equally distributed”. “Renewable energy
technologies are creating new jobs, however it is not equally distributed”. >A
map of the world with numbers and blue circles Description automatically
generated< Figure 7. Renewable energy employment in selected countries. (Source:
https://www.irena.org/-
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2022/Sep/IRENA_Renewable_energy_and_jobs_2
022.pdf) According to IRENA’s Renewable Energy and Jobs Annual Review 2022,
Asian countries host 79% of the world’s PV jobs, reflecting the region’s
continued dominance of manufacturing and strong presence in installations. The
remaining jobs were in the Americas 7.7%, Europe, 6.8% and the rest of the world
4.9%. Therefore, the sector’s diverse range of job opportunities should focus on
reducing inequalities and spreading the advantages of the renewable job market
across the world to ensure inclusive and just energy transition for development.
17)     Social Protection Sustainable energy’s intersection with social
protection represents key points in addressing vulnerabilities and supporting
inclusive development. The linkage between energy access and social protection
is profoundly integrated into SDGs by focusing on the complex impacts of the
energy transition. Ensuring strong social protection is part of UNDP’s energy
goals such as promoting universal social protection, empowering women, youth and
migrants and protecting informal workers. UNDP’s Energy for Social Protection
framework directly addresses these challenges by supporting vulnerable
individuals and families. The framework prioritizes overcoming the negative
social effects of the transition and integrating social protection into
sustainable energy to ensure no one is left behind. As transition requires
different investment and development models in affected communities, this
supports a just energy transition through offering diverse solutions specific to
these communities’ priorities and needs. 18)    Gender Equality in a just energy
transition A just energy transition has a pivotal role in ensuring gender
equality and creating gender responsive solutions. Energy poverty
disproportionately affects women and girls. As highlighted in the clean cooking
subchapter, lack of access to clean cooking causes household air pollution,
causing 3.2 million people to die prematurely from the exposure, the majority of
them women and girls. Women and men do not benefit equally from energy
programming, as they have differences in access to and control over resources,
which limits their capacity to invest in clean energy technologies; for example,
women may not have the bargaining power within the household to invest the
family budget in energy technologies that will ease their care tasks. Module 5,
focusing on the Gender and Energy Nexus, will delve deeper into the theme of
gender equality within the context of energy. Moreover, a study in 72 countries
shows that women represent only 6% of ministerial positions in energy policies
and programs. Similar results come from OECD/IEA’s analysis indicating that
women represent only 14% of senior managers in 2,500 firms under the energy-
related sectors. These studies show that overall, the energy sector fails to be
gender inclusive. Even though women are heavily affected by energy poverty,
their representations stay limited. Further, women are important entrepreneurs
and innovators; not having them join decision-making positions negatively
impacts the quality of decisions and the capacity of policies and projects to
serve women’s energy needs. Sustainable energy can be transformative for gender
equality if and when such initiatives are intentionally designed to address
gender gaps. As such, UNDP aims to close the gender gaps in access to
sustainable energy and sets a goal of closing the energy gap for 500 million
people by 2025, at least half of whom are women. This goal is in line with the
UNDP’s Gender Equality Strategy 2022-2025 which aims to ensure energy policy
support contributes to gender equality, promoting inclusion of women in energy
governance, supporting energy access to clean cooking to reduce time poverty and
increasing energy access to empowering women’s economic development. The
transition to sustainable energy with a gender responsive perspective can enable
an equitable, inclusive and just transition by leaving no one behind. As the
renewableAs renewable energy sector is already a stimulating job market, the
sector can provide opportunities for women by including policies and programmes
that empower them. As Figure 8 shows, women working in the solarin solar PV
sector reached 40% in 2021, which is the highest share of allbetween other
energy sources. Sustainable energy can offer a critical role for prioritizing
gender equality, raising awareness and challenging gender roles, providing
technical capacity and knowledge sharing in the sector to be in line with the
UNDP’s targets and SDGs for a just transition and leaving no one behind. >A
graph of energy consumption Description automatically generated with medium
confidence< Figure 8. Women in oil and gas, renewables overall, wind, solar and
economy-wide average. (Source:
https://www.irena.org/News/pressreleases/2022/Sep/Solar-PV-Employs-More-Women-
Than-Any-Renewables) 19)   Water, Food and Energy Nexus Water, food and energy
constitute a nexus in a sustainable energy for development pathway. Demand for
these three areas is rapidly increasing through rapid urbanization, population
growth, economic growth, and changing food diets. There is a significantly
increasing demand for more water-intensive foods such as meat and dairy products
with growing income across the world. Both food production and energy are water-
intensive sectors. Agriculture is the largest consumer of freshwater resources,
and the majority of energy generation consumes water intensively. These water-
intensive high-demand sectors put pressure on the water, food and energy nexus
by making water more scarce. This leads to challenges such as poverty, hunger,
environmental degradation and food access. Water scarcity limits access to
drinking water and basic hygiene practices at home, schools and healthcare and
leads to increasing water prices. Moreover, almost two-thirds of the world's
population, around four billion people, experience severe water scarcity where
the estimated amount of hours women and girls are dedicated to collecting it is
more than 30 minutes. t significantly shortens the time they can spend with
their families, on childcare, other household chores, and even leisure
activities. Water collection prevents both boys and girls from devoting time to
their education, and sometimes even from attending school. Moreover, women
smallholders having less access to irrigation technologies, addressing this can
improve food security as they are mainly engaged in sustenance agriculture.
Renewably powered irrigation projects can also help meet these needs. “Just
imagine: 200 million hours is 8.3 million days, or over 22,800 years, it would
be as if a woman started with her empty bucket in the Stone Age and didn’t
arrive home with water until 2016. Think how much the world has advanced in that
time. Think how much women could have achieved in that time.” In this context,
water, food and energy nexus represent a vital importance for overcoming these
challenges. Sustainable practices in both agriculture and energy are crucial for
providing safe and affordable water and food and aligning with broader
sustainable development goals. For example, renewable energy can present less
water-intensive solutions for energy generation while mitigating the adverse
effects of fossil fuels on marine ecosystems. Sustainable and efficient
irrigation practices in the agriculture sector can increase water availability
for household and home garden consumption and contribute to reducing women’s and
girls’ time poverty, freeing them to engage in other activities such as
education or income generation. Therefore, an integrated approach for water,
food and energy nexus is a key point in achieving many SDGs such as SDG 2 (Zero
Hunger), SDG 5 (Gender Equality), SDG 6 (Clean Water and Sanitation), SDG 7
(Affordable and Clean Energy) and SDG 12 (Responsible Consumption and
Production). Interactive/Multimedia Elements: Discussion: Asking participants to
explore examples related to three dimensions of sustainable energy in their
communities Engagement Activity: Scenario-Based Decision Making – Making
decisions on energy considering principles of sustainability with giving
scenarios II)   Foundations of Sustainable Energy II – pressing global
challenges and energy transition opportunities A)        Sustainable Energy as a
Global Urgency This chapter explores the importance of sustainable energy in
addressing pressing global challenges, including environmental degradation,
climate change, social inequalities, and energy disparities, discussing the
historical contributions of conventional energy sources to climate change and
the pivotal role of sustainable energy in reducing carbon emissions. “Together
we have an opportunity to build a better future. Just energy transitions can
improve jobs and livelihoods and strengthen economic resilience. We affirm that
no country should have to choose between fighting poverty and fighting for our
planet. We will pursue development models that implement sustainable, inclusive,
and just transitions globally, while leaving no one behind”. G20 New Delhi
Leaders’ Declaration, September 2023. 20)     Addressing pressing global
challenges Human activities contribute significantly to rising carbon emissions,
intensifying climate change impacts. Today, humanity faces a significant
challenge in meeting the Paris Agreement’s main aim to “keep global temperature
rise well below 2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels and to pursue
efforts to limit temperature increases to 1.5 degrees Celsius” - sustainable
energy is an essential component of this pathway. At its core, the critical
importance of sustainable energy stems from tackling many interconnected global
challenges ranging from environmental degradation and climate change to social
inequalities and energy disparities. Climate change brings many pressing global
challenges today from rising sea levels, threatening food systems, increasing
natural catastrophes such as flooding, droughts and heatwaves. Moreover, human
activities continuously affect the increase in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
caused by energy use, land use and consumption and production patterns.
According to IPCC AR6 Report, global temperature the best estimated to reach 1.5
degrees in near time with current patterns of GHG emissions leading to global
warming. Global warming not only threatens the environment, societies and
economies but also development by deepening the unequal distribution of burdens
of climate change. While human-caused activities are causing extreme climate and
weather, vulnerable communities that historically contribute the least to
climate change are affected adversely and disproportionately. The Report states
that the opportunity to secure a sustainable future becomes harder. Therefore,
urgently addressing these challenges is vital to taking immediate action on
threatening effects of climate change to ecosystems, societies and economies.
Sustainable energy presents a pathway by decarbonizing our energy use to reduce
GHG emissions and mitigate climate change. The need for urgent action links with
SDG7 and SDG13. Today, the world finds itself grappling with an array of
pressing challenges, many of which are exacerbated by the far-reaching impacts
of climate change. Among these challenges, extreme weather events stand out as
one of the major effects of climate change. Rapid increases in CO2 emissions are
causing global temperature anomalies. Figure 9 below shows global temperature
anomalies in 2022 and Figure 9 shows temperature anomalies in 1880-1884. The
last nine years are recorded as the warmest years since records began in the
1880s. Figure 9. Left, Temperature Anomaly in 1880-1884. Right, Temperature
Anomaly in 2022 (Source: https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/world-of-
change/global-temperatures) According to the World Meteorological Organization
(WMO) report, global temperatures are likely to surge to record levels in the
next five years, fueled by heat-trapping greenhouse gases and a naturally
occurring El Niño event. Every study carried out on an extreme heat event in the
last decade found that the likelihood of the event increased significantly
because of anthropogenic climate change. As a driver of extreme weather events,
climate change increases disaster risks in many ways by altering the frequency
and intensity of events, affecting vulnerability to hazards, and changing
exposure patterns. As global temperatures rise, the ocean experiences a
corresponding increase in warmth, resulting in expanded volume due to the
water's thermal expansion. The melting of ice sheets further contributes to
rising sea levels, posing a direct threat to coastal and island communities.
Additionally, the ocean serves as a vital carbon dioxide sink, mitigating its
presence in the atmosphere. The influx of more carbon dioxide into the ocean
also leads to increased acidity, posing a significant risk to marine life and
coral reefs. Biodiversity loss, another critical concern, is intricately linked
to climate change as shown in Figure 10. As temperatures rise and habitats
shift, many species face the peril of extinction. Figure 10. Drivers of
Biodiversity Loss. Source: <a href="https://www.researchgate.net/publication/325
271508_Global_mismatch_of_policy_and_research_on_drivers_of_biodiversity_loss">h
ttps://www.researchgate.net/publication/325271508_Global_mismatch_of_policy_and_
research_on_drivers_of_biodiversity_loss</a> The impacts of climate change
extend into the realm of public health, introducing new and exacerbated risks.
Vector-borne diseases are spreading to new regions as the climate becomes more
hospitable to disease vectors. Extreme heat events, intensified by global
warming, pose health risks to vulnerable populations, especially in urban areas.
Air and water pollution, often exacerbated by industrial activities and
unsustainable practices, contribute to a decline in environmental health. The
consequences of pollution are felt not only in the degradation of natural
habitats but also in the compromised well-being of communities that depend on
clean air and water for survival needs. Moreover, food crises are becoming more
frequent and severe as climate change disrupts agricultural patterns.
Unpredictable weather patterns, extreme temperatures, and changing precipitation
levels threaten food security, placing vulnerable populations at risk of hunger
and malnutrition. Food security becomes one of the more pressing challenges in
many countries, causing rising food prices. Perhaps one of the most profound
challenges emerging from climate change is the issue of climate displacement.
Rising sea levels, extreme weather events, and the degradation of habitable land
force communities to migrate in search of safer living conditions. This
phenomenon not only strains social and political systems but also underscores
the urgency of addressing climate change as a root cause. 21)    The link
between threatening climate change effects and energy dynamics Delving into the
threatening effects of climate change, this subchapter establishes a link
between climate change and conventional energy sources, exploring the
consequences of conventional energy sources and explaining its role as a driver
of climate change. In the face of sustainable energy as a global urgency, it is
important to delve into the existential threatening effects of climate change,
especially its link with energy sources and energy use. This pressing challenge
of changing climate is highly linked with human activities historically,
particularly releasing GHG emissions into the atmosphere. As the graph shows,
conventional energy sources such as coal, oil and gas have played a major role
as the main contributor causing increasing CO2 emissions,global warming and
unfolding climate crisis with profound consequences for ecosystems, societies
and economies. Figure 11 shows a rapid increase after the 1950s with increasing
urbanization, population growth and industrialization depending on fossil fuels.
Figure 11. Historical data on CO2 emissions by fuel or industry type globally
(Source: Our World in Data) From generating power to manufacturing goods,
powering buildings to over-consumption, fossil fuels – coal, oil and gas – are
by far the largest contributor to global climate change, accounting for over 75
per cent of global greenhouse gas emissions and nearly 90 per cent of all carbon
dioxide emissions. In examining the critical nexus between threatening climate
change effects and energy dynamics, a historical perspective unveils the roots
of atmospheric CO2 rise. The escalation above pre-industrial levels were
predominantly attributed to human-induced land-use changes, particularly
deforestation. However, as shown in the Table, a pivotal shift occurred around
1950, marking the ascendancy of emissions from fossil fuels as the primary
anthropogenic contributor. This transition, fueled by industrialization’s
reliance on fossil fuels for energy set the stage for an enduring dominance that
persists to the present day. Against this backdrop, the intricate dynamics of
the natural carbon cycle come into focus, wherein anthropogenic emissions
intersect with the circulation of carbon among the atmosphere, ocean, and
terrestrial biosphere on various timescales. The longer-term exchanges with
geologic reservoirs further underscore the complexity of managing carbon in the
Earth system. Figure 12. Globally averaged surface air temperature for all
months of July from 1940 to 2023. Shades of blue indicate cooler-than-average
years, while shades of red show years that were warmer than average. (Source:
https://public-old.wmo.int/en/media/news/july-2023-confirmed-hottest-month-
record) Anthropogenic emissions persist in driving global temperatures to
unprecedented highs. Scientists note that July 2023 stands as the hottest month
on record, as shown in Figure 12, marking the onset of what is described as "the
era of global boiling" and likely the warmest period in the past 120,000 years.
This alarming trend unfolds worldwide through heat waves, droughts, wildfires,
storms, and floods, affecting many lives and livelihoods. These occurrences
unmistakably underscore the tangible and immediate impacts of human-induced
climate change. In response to the threatening effects of climate change driven
by fossil fuels, there is an urgent need for a just energy transition to
sustainable energy sources, the phase-out of fossil fuels, and a boost in energy
efficiency. 22)       Sustainable energy’s role in climate change mitigation and
energy transition The ongoing global energy transition, broadly defined as a
systemic shift towards specific fuel sources or technologies in academic
literature marks the fourth in history. Unlike past transitions such as biomass
to coal, and to oil and natural gas driven by economic efficiency, the current
shift from fossil fuels to low-carbon sources is "problem-driven," propelled by
the urgent need to address climate change. Moreover, as shown in Figure 13,
previous changes could more accurately be characterized as energy additions
rather than transitions. In both cases, the use of the older energy source
continued to grow, despite rapid growth in the new source. Figure 13. Global
primary energy consumption by source. (Source:
https://ourworldindata.org/energy-production-consumption) Transitioning to
sustainable energy systems, necessitated by the imperative of decarbonization,
distinguishes itself from historical opportunities. Policies such as carbon
taxes, renewable obligations, and cap-and-trade mechanisms underscore the
commitment to climate-driven change, making the transition distinct in
motivation, highlighting difference between expanding the production of a new
energy source and a transition away from (i.e., a genuine decline in the use of)
more established energy sources. Therefore, sustainable energy systems
transformation stands as a potent tool for addressing climate change mitigation
both in demand side by increasing renewable energy capacity and supply side,
phasing out fossil fuels and accelerating decarbonization. In contrast to fossil
fuel energy sources, major CO2 emitters, sustainable energy sources serve as
low-carbon alternatives, emitting zero to minimal direct emissions during
electricity generation. This positions sustainable energy as a crucial tool for
climate change mitigation. As illustrated in Table, renewable energy sources
have been steadily increasing globally. However, fossil fuels persist as the
primary energy source and consumption, highlighting the urgent need for
comprehensive action. Accelerating the energy transition requires a shift beyond
the demand side, focusing on the supply side and necessitating the accelerated
phase-out of fossil fuels to align with the 1.5°C pathway. The year 2023
witnessed a surge in wind and solar energy, projected to grow annually at a rate
of 15 to 20%. A recent analysis indicates that if the observed trend of
renewable capacity additions in 2023 continues, global capacity will more than
double by 2030, signaling a transformative shift in the energy landscape. This
energy transition not only builds momentum in climate change mitigation but also
facilitates a shift in energy access and finance, addressing interconnected
global issues from energy security to social inclusion. Opportunities are
emerging for a new clean energy economy, led by solar PV and electric vehicles
(EVs), with a notable 40 percent increase in clean energy investment since 2020.
Countries such as Uruguay, Maldives, and Sri Lanka are actively decarbonizing
their transport sectors with EV deployment. The next subchapter dives into
energy as a cross-cutting global issue intricately linked with diverse action
areas, from energy security to leveraging multistakeholder partnerships. B)
Interconnectedness with Global Issues 23)       Energy as a cross-cutting global
issue and nexus approach While energy is key to sustainable development and
mitigating the adverse impacts of climate change, it is closely linked to
various global issues, including energy security, poverty alleviation, and
addressing energy vulnerability and disparities. Building upon the climate
change and energy relations discussed in the previous chapter, energy serves as
a cross-cutting backbone interconnected with global issues. Beyond climate
change, there are a multitude of challenging consequences of energy use such as
energy security, poverty alleviation and social development. Transitioning away
from fossil fuels to sustainable energy systems not only mitigates climate
change but also creates development opportunities and contributes to a resilient
future. Through sustainable energy, more people can access affordable and
reliable energy services, acting as a catalyst for economic growth and
development. The transformation to sustainable energy systems enables access to
critical services such as education, healthcare and clean water for vulnerable
and marginalized communities. A nexus approach can create synergies and
interactions among various development opportunities, such as inclusive growth,
finance, gender equality, social inclusion, environment, governance, health, and
more, while helping to achieve the interconnected goals of the SDGs. This
interconnected potential aligns with the SDG 1 (No Poverty), SDG 3 (Good Health
and Well-being) and SDG 4 (Quality Education), emphasizing the role sustainable
energy for development. Improving energy access (SDG 7) can contribute to SDG 5
(Gender Equality) by empowering women through gender-rresponsive approaches.
Accelerating climate goals (SDG 13) and transitioning to sustainable energy
systems simultaneously reinforce connections with other SDGs, fostering
innovations in industrial infrastructure (SDG 9) and promoting decent jobs (SDG
8). This dynamic synergy can drive transformative change. Figures 14 and 15.
Overview of synergies (left) and trade-offs (right) between SDG target pairs.
Selected target: 7.1, ensuring universal access to affordable, reliable and
modern energy services (Source:
https://knowsdgs.jrc.ec.europa.eu/interlinkages/targets) The nexus concept
emphasizes the interconnected nature of energy as it intersects with various
issues, fostering connections, synergies, and trade-offs. This approach presents
opportunities for solutions by simultaneously achieving multiple SDGs through
the identification of synergies and co-benefits, as well as recognizing trade-
offs and unexpected consequences, thereby enhancing integrated approaches. As
illustrated in Figures 14 and 15, SDG goals are interconnected, ensuring that
energy access cuts across various areas of sustainable development targets.
Further details on the nexus between energy and sustainable development will be
explored in Module 9. 24)   Fostering energy security and economic growth
Sustainable energy’s role in ensuring access for all and presenting
opportunities for economic growth reflects a transformative shift, promising
energy security. These aspects are highly linked with core pillars of energy
access, energy transition and energy finance, forming the foundation of
sustainable energy for development narrative. Energy security is a key element
for ensuring society’s access to reliable energy sources. Sustainable energy,
with decentralized and diversified energy sources, contributes significantly to
energy security. Sustainable energy systems transformation represents reducing
dependence on a single energy source or supplier. Due to its resource
availability, sustainable energy creates opportunities for the diversification
of economies, unlike reliance on finite energy sources such as oil, gas and
coal. This role holds a potent tool for protecting the energy market from
volatile energy prices and enabling energy security and economic growth. Over
reliance on fossil fuels has historically left countries vulnerable to price
fluctuations and supply disruptions. From extraction to transportation, fossil
fuels have been presenting geopolitical implications such as resource-rich
countries often finding themselves in the position to influence the global
energy policies and market while countries that depend on imports are mostly
affected by disruptions and price fluctuations. This has led to strategic
alliances in international relations, even in some cases international tensions,
interventions, influenced regional dynamics and global power balances. In terms
of transportation, oil transit is concentrated in critical chokepoints which are
geographically narrow passages that make them susceptible to blockades or any
other disruptions. They have become a focal point for global contention and can
lead to energy security challenges for both exporting and importing countries.
Although fossil fuel prices are down from their 2022 peaks, they continue to
contribute to tense and volatile markets with remaining uncertainty regarding
the stability of energy markets, geopolitics, and the global economy. Figure 16.
The market size for energy transition minerals doubled over the past five years.
(Source: IEA, https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/afc35261-41b2-47d4-86d6-
d5d77fc259be/CriticalMineralsMarketReview2023.pdf) At the same time,, driven by
the growth of clean energy technologies, bridging the supply and demand gap for
critical minerals is becoming crucial. Critical minerals that are essential
components in batteries, solar panels and wind turbines are altering the global
energy landscape as well as geopolitical shifts and bringing geopolitical
advantages to countries that have access to them. Increasing demand for critical
minerals, as illustrated in Figure 16, raises emphasis on the need for
sustainable and just extraction practices for minerals like copper, lithium, and
cobalt, whose demand is projected to nearly quadruple by 2030. China is setting
an example in this regard by actively developing a comprehensive recycling and
raw materials recovery system for wind turbines and solar panels. Energy storage
has emerged as an innovative technology in the sustainable energy transition.
Innovations in battery technologies such as lithium-ion batteries present the
potential for excess energy storage generated by intermittent renewable energy
resources such as solar and wind can enable energy security. While the use of
electronic vehicles has been increasing to decarbonize the transport sector, the
need to accommodate renewable energy supply without disrupted output in
electricity generation provides another significant potential for energy storage
technologies. 25)        Multisectoral impacts and alignment of sustainable
energy The transition to sustainable energy has far-reaching impacts on various
sectors, from the health, education, and food sectors to the transport and
building sectors. The transition is a complex process that requires an
integrated approach, encompassing these diverse sectors and necessitating multi-
sector collaboration. This creates a dual relationship between energy and these
various sectors. While these sectors contribute to carbon emissions and can play
a key role in mitigating emissions, the energy transition can provide numerous
opportunities by providing reliable, affordable and clean access to them. For
example, energy transition can represent developments in healthcare facilities
as it enables energy access to all which links SDG7 (Affordable and Clean
Energy) and SDG3 (Good Health and Well-being). In terms of education, increasing
reliable access to electricity through sustainable energy systems transition
expands educational opportunities by providing power to schools in underserved
regions. This aligns with SDG4 (Quality Education) while creating educational
equity. As one of the biggest contributors to GHG emissions, the food sector can
lead to a transformative change in agricultural activities and supply chain by
promoting low carbon emissions resources in the sector. Navigating the
multisectoral impacts requires a comprehensive understanding of the
interconnected pathways. Policymakers, business and industry actors and
communities need to collaborate to leverage collaboration and synergies between
sectors, fostering a sustainable energy transformation that permeates every
facet of our interconnected world. Scaling up energy access and energy financing
through cross-sector partnerships reflects a key potential for facilitating
investments and innovation towards energy transition. Cross-sector partnerships
can address many market barriers through the alignment of the competencies of
global and local actors along a cross-sector value chain. These partnerships
unite energy providers, including utilities and technology service providers,
with industries requiring dependable and cost-effective energy. These industries
range from telecoms and agriculture to mining, fast-moving consumer goods such
as cooling, the food industry, and local small and medium-sized enterprises with
diverse energy needs. These sectors’ partnerships energy transition can
translate multisector impacts and alignment of sustainable energy. Many sectors
have been setting commitments and pledges to lower their carbon emissions,
scaling up investments for energy access and partnering around specific goals in
energy transition. For example, the cooling sector has stepped up to reduce
predicted 2050 sectoral emissions by at least 60%, provide universal access to
life-saving cooling, and achieve significant savings by 2050. This effort
centers on passive cooling, higher energy efficiency standards, and a faster
phase-down of climate-warming refrigerants￼. The IEA estimates that around 60%
of the finance for emerging and developing economies clean energy investment
(outside China) will need to come from the private sector. To enable the amount
of private investment for energy transition in these economies, the IEA
forecasted some USD 80-100 billions of concessional finance per year will be
needed by the early 2030s. This emphasizes the imperative and opportunity for
increased private sector investment and identifies the importance of the cross-
sectoral engagement to bridge the financing gap needed for adapting to climate
change impacts, mitigating sectoral emissions and achieving countries’
sustainable development goals. C)        Challenges and Opportunities 26)
Challenges I – Energy Inequalities and Multidimensional Energy Poverty The
UNSustainable Development Goals (SDGs) were adopted in 2015 by member states
with a view to being met by 2030. While global energy access has seen progress,
the number of people without electricity access has fallen globally by around
390 million since 2015, progress has been slower in some regions. Numbers
represent a significant disproportion of global energy investment to close
energy access gap. For example, although Africa accounts for one-fifth of the
world population, as of September 2023, the region attracts only 3% of global
energy investment. To scale up impact in African countries to achieve energy-
related development goals, including universal access to clean, affordable and
modern energy, there is a need to for energy investment to double by 2030.
Energy inequality is one of the critical challenges that society faces in
achieving a just energy transition, particularly in rural and underserved areas.
This multifaceted challenge generates a range of disparities by creating energy
poverty, energy insecurity, fuel poverty, environmental inequality, carbon
inequality, and environmental degradation. UNDP emphasizes the need for an
integrated approach through a sustainable energy for development pathway to
respond to energy inequality challenges characterized by the unequal
distribution of energy resources and significant implications for resilience.
The disproportionate distribution of energy is a barrier to energy transition,
creating multidimensional energy poverty implications which can lead to major
populations beingl deprived of fundamental rights such as healthcare, education
and social and economic growth. This aspect of energy inequality refers to
energy’s interlinkages with broader poverty and developmental challenges.
Therefore, the energy transition has a crucial role in providing transformative
change and addressing multidimensional energy poverty to achieve sustainable
energy for development. Energy poverty impacts vulnerability, deprivation, and
insecurity due to accessibility and affordability issues. Most developing
countries are challenged by energy poverty issues in this context of
accessibility to clean energy sources. Moreover, these issues exceed into energy
inefficiency in infrastructure and buildings, divergence between stakeholders
needs, high energy prices and energy expenditure, environmental pressure and
implications for human well-being. Energy inequality is closely reflected on
energy justice and one of the challenges in front of achieving energy transition
and sustainable development. Therefore, achieving a sustainable energy
transformation necessitates addressing this multifaceted issue of energy
inequality which needs to be present opportunities for everyone for a fair
distribution and use of energy. Sustainable energy catalyzes to remove these
barriers through reducing dependence on fossil fuels, particularly imported
fuels, enhancing energy diversification and energy access which creates a
pathway to development. 27)  Challenges II – Fossil Fuel Dependency and Lack of
Energy Diversification Fossil fuel dependency has a significant impact on many
facades in our society from environmental aspects to economic consequences. For
example, deforestation is one of the environmental impacts of fossil fuel
dependency, often associated with fossil fuel extraction and land use changes
intensifying biodiversity loss and disrupting food production, water supply and
the ecosystem which causing water scarcity and food insecurity. Fossil fuel
extraction and transportation concentrates on the geopolitical implications
which creates increasing demand for limited resources. Disruptions in the supply
chain due to conflicts, political instability and market fluctuations can have
far-reaching consequences such as increasing energy prices which lead to
challenges in energy access. Ultimately, reliance on fossil fuels brings fiscal
and economic consequences for both fossil fuel export and import dependent
economies. Therefore, there is a growing and urgent need for sustainable energy
systems transformations for energy diversification and energy security while
creating long-term sustainable development and mitigating environmental,
political and social risks of fossil fuel dependency. Energy concentration on a
single energy source has different implications for countries. Fossil fuel
dependent economies are based on three key dependencies: rents, exports and
government revenue. While some countries such as Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar and
Saudi Arabia have experienced good economic performance by fossil fuel
exporting, other countries such as Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan, Libya, Nigeria,
and Venezuela with a large share of fossil fuels in total export did not
experience strong economic growth. This shows that economic performance has been
volatile as it faced unstable demand, geopolitical concerns, supply chain and
uncertainty shocks. Many countries that lack significant fossil-fuel energy
sources rely on imported fossil fuels. This also creates a fragile environment
for those countries in front of uncertainty shocks related to energy prices,
energy supply and geopolitics. Energy diversification can reduce these internal
and external risks including energy security and its impact on across sectors
(e.g., food prices) due to price spikes and volatility. A diversified energy mix
is an important driver for just energy transition while building a resilient
development pathway in countries through mitigating climate change effects and
bringing sustainable economic growth. Global decarbonization could have a spill-
over effect in these fossil fuel export-dependent countries by creating fragile
socio-economic consequences as demand increases and is expected to grow for the
transition minerals, needed in cleaner energy technologies and electrification.
Although fossil fuel rents have been large, and prices are forecasted to remain
high in the shorter term, fossil fuel producers are left in a dilemma related to
the uncertainty surrounding global decarbonization: producer countries are
reluctant to phase out fossil fuels, so they continue to invest largely in
resources that carry the risk of remaining unused. Therefore, energy
diversification is crucial to creating long-term economic growth. Transitioning
into sustainable energy is a fundamental part of a diversified energy mix and
achieving overall sustainable development goals. 28) This Opportunities I –
Digital and Data for Accelerating Just Energy Transition Digital and data
revolution reveals the transformative impacts in sustainable energy for a
sustainable development pathway. In recent years, innovative technologies and
digitalization have brought a new era of widespread connectivity and reliable,
affordable and accessible clean energy solutions as well as breakthroughs in
renewable energy technologies such as energy storage, smart grids and grid
management. These innovations are driving the energy transition into efficient
and effective decarbonization of energy systems. Electrification with renewables
emerges as a cost-effective solution that enhances energy security, energy
supply and mitigating fuel price volatility. AI (Artificial Intelligence), IoT
(Internet of Things), and blockchain technologies have a fundamental role in
navigating the complex relationship between energy and power systems and
accelerating the energy transition through energy planning, smart grids, grid
optimization, pay-as-you-go and peer-to-peer trading (P2P). Grid-related
investments in digital technologies have surged by over 50% since 2015,
especially in electricity networks. Smart electrification as a cost-effective
decarbonization pathway, offers substantial benefits for economic growth,
climate change mitigation and broader sustainable development goals. Moreover,
advancements in grid management systems, such as smart grids enable efficient
energy distribution and demand response by being equipped with sensors, real-
time data on the electricity supply and demand and decentralized energy
management while providing a cost-effective and reliable grid system. Links
between power systems and end-user sectors such as transportation, industry,
building and industrial sectors, are deepening as demand for electricity grows
and decarbonization efforts increase. This relation requires information
exchange and more powerful tools to plan and operate power systems as they keep
evolving. Digitalization in energy transition can collect and analyze data to be
in track with renewable energy resources. Generating analytics to plan optimal
off-grid electricity solutions, such as solar mini-grids or solar home systems,
for people in rural and remote communities can have a pivotal role in achieving
local development through sustainable energy transformation. Digital
technologies can transform many sectors through sustainable and efficient use of
resources, such as e-mobility, smart agriculture and smart cities. While
automated systems, cheaper sensors and mobile payment systems bring a spread use
of new innovations such as pay-as-you-go business models, these technologies can
also improve sustainable livelihoods and provide access to renewable energy in
remote communities. Digital and data technologies can also collaborate with
energy financing, creating an environment for investments by reducing risks,
particularly through increased transparency through blockchain technologies.
Overall, digital transformation is one of the catalyzers toward achieving SDGs.
Intersection of digital, data and energy is becoming increasingly crucial in
navigating renewable power systems. These digital advancements not only
mitigating climate change and advances climate targets but also empowers
communities, women and youth and builds a more resilient long term sustainable
development. 29)   Opportunities II – Multi-actor Knowledge Sharing and Co-
creating Solutions for Just Energy Transition As just energy transition
multifaceted shift requires a holistic and systematic approach, building and
leveraging collaborations are crucial to address multiple dimensions of
sustainability. Multi-actor knowledge sharing can nourish this diverse
collaboration between local communities, private sector, academics, scientists
and policy makers. As energy transition is a knowledge-intensive process,
technical knowledge can provide an important opportunity to enhance data
generation and evaluation which is needed for analyzing the information for
energy transition, such as environmental impact, life cycles assessments and
future scenarios. This is crucial to close the gap between commitments and
actions and generate actionable steps for sustainable energy transformation and
climate goals. For co-creating solutions towards just energy transition,
interacting with local knowledge and community-based adaptation and
understanding historical and cultural background are crucial as an adaptation
strategy for climate change and local development. As examples show, the
application of local and indigenous knowledge has helped mitigate disaster
impacts, enabling residents to cope with high flood exposure. Particularly, in
rural areas, leveraging local and indigenous knowledge emerges as a potential
solution to enhance local resilience. This can be also applicable for climate
change mitigation and just energy transition. Traditional knowledge systems,
specific to the locality, prove to be a valuable strategy for responding to
climate change in regions with weak institutional capacities, limited budgets,
and insufficient climate change awareness. Connecting with local communities and
their knowledge can scale up impact for sustainable energy projects and broader
sustainable development goals. In renewable energy system multi-actor
involvement, such as including municipalities, prosumers, community energy
projects, and non-energy institutions and industries, is becoming increasingly
crucial part in implementation and management of these projects. This approach
also holds social and environmental benefits in decentralized energy systems
overall. Just energy transition encompasses many diverse actors to be ensured to
address specific needs and priorities while driving local development in
communities. This systematic and holistic approach can be integrating technical
and social research needed in co-creating solutions for energy transition. III)
Navigating the Path to Sustainable Energy: Three Pillars of the Sustainable
Energy Hub A)       Introducing the Sustainable Energy Hub Framework This
chapter presents an overview of the Sustainable Energy Hub framework, the SEH’s
role in guiding and catalyzing the transformation of sustainable energy systems
and outlines its core pillars. SEH’s core pillars define an integrated approach
in addressing energy access, energy transition and energy finance to create
comprehensive solutions for sustainable energy systems transformation. While
each pillar plays an interconnected role in supporting one anther, they also
align with the SEH’s role in catalyzing the UNDP’s work and strategies on
accelerating sustainable energy transition, alongside with the UNDP’s Energy
Moonshot understanding. The SEH serves as a global center within UNDP to address
and respond to growing global challenges and focus development through
sustainable energy and creating country-specific solutions. Exploring Three
Pillars of the Sustainable Energy Hub The SEH focuses on three core pillars for
advance a “Sustainable Energy for Development” framework: --     Closing the gap
on energy access: The first pillar of the SEH and emphasizes its role in
expanding equitable energy access to close the gap between marginalized people
and communities. --     Accelerate the energy transition: The second pillar
focuses on accelerating the transition to sustainable energy sources through a
systemic approach that encompasses supporting green recovery and improving
efficiency by collaborating and bringing ideas from governments, countries, and
different sectors such as finance, business, digital and communities, people and
civil societies. --      Energy finance: The third pillar addresses the energy
finance challenges and emphasizes scaling up public and private sector
investments for accelerating sustainable energy systems transformation. The SEH
presents as a facilitator between knowledge across the organization and
integrates energy as UNDP’s main intervention areas. B)    Energy Moonshot and
Catalyzing Change Through Accelerators This chapter dives into the UNDP Energy
Moonshot and how UNDP is catalyzing change through accelerators such as market
development, digital intelligence and thought leadership. Energy Moonshot
provides alignment with the UNDP’s Strategic Plan 2022-2025, the UN-Energy Plan
of Action and core pillars of the SEH towards 2025 to drive change to accelerate
the transition to renewable energy. Energy Moonshot connects with these plans
and strategies by placing sustainable energy as the center of development and
expanding the integration of the energy transition across the UNDP’s portfolio
by targeting to benefit 500 million people by 2025 with access to sustainable,
affordable and reliable energy and accelerate the transition to renewable energy
through systemic changes lead to inclusive green economies. UNDP supports the
Energy Moonshot through these three accelerators: Thought Leadership: Thought
leadership accelerates the sustainable energy transition by bringing together
the best ideas from government, business, communities and civil societies and
the SEH supports country offices and partners through producing strategies,
guidelines, bulletin and the Sustainable Energy Academy. Regional energy
strategies identify specific needs, challenges and solutions to accelerate
energy transition by supporting countries in five regional bureaus and SIDS.
Digital Intelligence: This subchapter emphasizes how digital tools accelerate
change by enhancing energy planning, project preparation, investment
mobilization and result tracking. Digitalization is also part of the Strategic
Plan 2022-2025 as one of the enablers that support countries to build inclusive,
ethical and sustainable digital societies. Digital transformation is a key part
of sustainable energy for development pathway. UNDP supports many countries to
facilitate energy transition through digital and data tools, such as assisting
in generating analytics to plan optimal off-grid electricity solutions (e.g.,
solar mini-grids or solar home systems) which provide electricity access for
people in rural and remote communities. Market Development: Market development
is one of the accelerators for a just transition through developing innovative
de-risking mechanisms, financing and business models to attract investments for
sustainable energy transformation. De-Risking Renewable Energy Investment
(DREI), as a developing business model and flagship initiative of SEH, supports
reducing barriers and risks to attract private sector investments in renewable
energy. DREI assists policymakers in public interventions to reduce risks for
investors through three public intervention actions (e.g., reducing,
transferring, and compensating for risk) and as a result ensures to achievement
of clean, affordable and reliable energy transition in developing countries.
UNDP is also supporting country offices and partners to accelerate Energy
Moonshot through supporting national development banks (NBDs) and large
financial institutions (LFIs) to integrate sustainability into their operations
and scale up blended finance for a just energy transition.
Interactive/Multimedia Element: Engagement Activity: Before diving into
practical examples for next chapter, encouraging participants to reflecting what
have been learnt through Module 1 so far IV)      Regional Perspective and
Country Office Examples A)     Regional Perspective Sustainable energy
transformation is a multifaceted process that unfolds differently in various
regions of the world, each setting diverse challenges and opportunities. As they
transition into clean energy technologies, regions face distinctive barriers
such as infrastructure, resource availability, economic disparities and
regulatory frameworks. Simultaneously, they also represent their own potential
for opportunities, driven by local resources, innovative technologies and energy
independence. Navigating towards sustainable energy systems transformation
requires an understanding of each regional dynamic and creating tailor-made
solutions for these specific needs and priorities of countries. These regional
challenges and opportunities interplay as a foundation of global energy
transition and are linked with development driven by this transformation.
Recognizing and identifying distinct regional energy challenges and
opportunities and framing within sustainable development provides an
understanding of renewable sources, energy demand patterns, and socioeconomic
factors, setting a foundation for policymakers to delve into the regional energy
landscape. Through a solid understanding of regional energy dynamics,
policymakers can formulate strategies and initiatives that align with SDGs such
as clean energy incentives, subsidies, regulatory frameworks and financial
mechanisms for transition. Therefore, the chapter presents a regional
perspective through region-specific challenges and opportunities alongside
development solutions which highlights the collaborative approach of the UNDP
and the Sustainable Energy Hub to strengthening existing partnerships and
building new ones to achieve net-zero emissions. Engaging partnerships,
including diverse stakeholders from local communities to private sector is
essential for shaping policies that resonate with specific regional needs and
priorities and facilitate turning these policies into practice through
collaborative efforts to develop infrastructure and enhance investments in
renewable energy technologies. 30)      RBA (Regional Bureau for Africa)
Sustainable energy systems transformation in Africa holds an important role in
being transformative and supporting economic growth as a catalyzer. Africa has
been facing energy poverty, with millions of people lacking access to affordable
and reliable electricity and clean cooking, even the continent’s existing
abundance and potential. While energy access remains a pressing concern, climate
change severely affects the region’s developmental progress. Defining these
issues involves understanding the implications of energy poverty on economic
growth, local development and environmental sustainability. Sustainable energy
offers a bridge to closing the gap in energy access and supporting Africa’s
potential for promoting sustainable development through energy access,
transition, and finance. This helps address the region’s challenges and ensures
a just and equitable energy transition. Transitioning into clean energy, Sub-
Saharan Africa exhibits distinct characteristics of holding huge and untapped
energy resources while having the lowest energy access. The critical minerals
needed for energy transition provide a strong foundation as a driver for the
region’s green growth and shift to clean energy will heighten the demand for
these resources to develop renewable technologies. Africa holds substantial
mineral reserves, around 66% of the world’s cobalt, 10% of copper, 30% lithium,
15% of rare earth elements, 95% of chromium and 30% manganese. Facilitating
sustainable development in the region requires effective strategies and
initiatives to responsibly utilize these natural resources within diverse
sectors such as agriculture, mining and energy and strengthen the critical
mineral value chain through responsible mining practices. UNDP is committed to
delivering a just energy transition in Africa by presenting integrated
development solutions through a systems approach from the region’s perspective,
as stated in the Strategic Plan 2022-2025. The Strategic Plan aims to close the
energy access gap and facilitate a just energy transition at country and
regional levels which aligns with the SEH core pillars of energy access and
energy transition. Sustainable energy for development goals in Africa aligns
with the UNDP’s several agendas such as “Renewed Strategic Offer in Africa”
which aims to strengthen the UNDP’s role in Africa as an integrator for the 2030
Sustainable Development Agenda. The UNDP’s agendas and SEH core pillars also
align with regional initiatives such as the African Union’s Agenda 2063 which
aims to “attain inclusive and sustainable economic growth and development” and
the African Common Position on Energy Access and Just Transition. 31)      RBLAC
(Regional Bureau for Latin America and the Caribbean) Transitioning to
sustainable energy and decarbonization holds the potential for clean economic
growth and stimulating green jobs by overcoming regional challenges such as
inequality and poverty in Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) region. In this
region, inflation, limited capital inflows, dependence on natural resources,
high interest rates and limiting monetary policies are paramount challenges, all
of which hold back economic growth and local development. Regional challenges
driven by inflation and high energy prices have an impact on inequality, energy
poverty, access and affordability in vulnerable communities. Inequalities within
the region stand out as one of the highest globally which challenges the middle-
income development trap along with stagnation of competitiveness and growth.
Moreover, the region has been disproportionately affected by adverse impacts of
climate change and natural disasters. Heat extremes and changing precipitation
patterns have been causing adverse effects on urban areas, agriculture and
biodiversity particularly in the Amazon rainforest. Climate change challenges
not only environmental degradation but also limits poverty reduction, job
creation and overall, development of the region. Every year, around 150,000 to
2.1 million people are driven into extreme poverty due to natural disasters and
these numbers could increase to 3 million people annually by 2030. Furthermore,
the Caribbean is the most prone area to climate-caused natural disasters with
ocean acidification, sea level rise, tropical cyclones and temperature changes
which challenge the region with the highest energy prices and the substantial
cost of frequent natural disasters which are estimated at USD 100 billion in
investment to adapt climate impacts as shown in Figure 17. Figure 17. Average
cost of natural disasters and energy prices in the Caribbean. (Source:
https://www.imf.org/en/Blogs/Articles/2023/06/27/caribbean-climate-crisis-
demands-urgent-action-by-governments-and-investors) On the other hand, rich
biodiversity and opportunities in bioeconomy present developmental opportunities
in Latin America. The region possesses distinctive advantages for its natural
resources to lead in green hydrogen, renewable energy and clean transportation.
Therefore, sustainable energy systems transformations represent opportunities
for inclusive development in the region. SEH’s integrated portfolio approach
will provide significant progress in Latin America to achieve SDG 7 and link
other SDGs. UNDP’s work in the LAC region continues to deliver an integrated
systems approach with region-specific priorities to support sustainable energy
and development. While enhancing the collaboration in the region, UNDP aims to
accelerate the energy transition in three main areas: enabling sustainable
energy investments, building sustainable and inclusive cities, and supporting
the region’s small island countries to reduce their dependence on fossil fuels.
UNDP provides policy support for creating an environment to enable renewable
energy, energy efficiency and investments in sustainable energy. Accelerating a
just energy transition requires financial innovation in the public and private
sectors and comprehensive assessments of financial instruments to enable the
transition such as incentives for renewable energy and fossil fuels subsidies.
32)     RBEC (Regional Bureau for Europe and CIS) Europe and Central Asia
represent various opportunities and challenges in the energy transition and
decarbonization. While energy poverty is largely resolved in the region, the
Western Balkans, South Caucasus and Central Asia continue to face challenges in
conflict and development. Besides challenges in inequalities and decent
employment, many countries in the region are experiencing outward and transit
migration flows, which are the highest globally. Impacts of the war in Ukraine
has been affecting the region by creating challenges around energy security,
supply chain and migration. With the other conflicts and governmental issues in
the region, there is a rising need for diversification of energy sources without
relying on the geopolitical implications of fossil fuels, especially natural
gas. On the other hand, climate change already puts pressure on extreme weather
events and shared natural resources in the region. Several countries in the
region are already investing in renewable energy and presenting national
commitments to transition to net zero emissions, however, there is still a need
to enhance energy security due to energy geopolitics affecting energy supply and
price fluctuations. Regional level cooperations are also playing a key role,
such as membership in the Eurasian Economic Union and ‘Belt and Road’ initiative
led by the People’s Republic of China. While the region represents diverse
challenges and opportunities, the UNDP Strategic Plan 2022-2025 provides
integrated development solutions driven by country priorities through focusing
different areas such as poverty, inequality, environment, gender equality and
energy. 33)     RBAP (Regional Bureau for Asia and the Pacific) The Asia-Pacific
region accounts for over half of the world’s energy consumption and GHG
emissions while the energy demand has been growing rapidly by urbanization and
industrialization. Even though the region presents progress towards SDG 7 (Clean
Energy) and SDG 9 (Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure) by being increasing
suppliers of clean energy, especially China’s expansion of solar PV and onshore
wind capacity, the region lacks progressive climate action, SDG 13, due to
energy mix rely on fossil fuels. The region faces challenges such as high
inflation, uncertain macroeconomic outlook, debt and supply chain bottlenecks,
accelerated by adverse impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and high energy prices.
Gas is expected to play a significant role in the energy mix as many countries
are expanding their gas grids alongside integrating renewable energy for
diversification of energy sources to ensure energy security. However, reliance
on fossil fuels causes adverse environmental, economic, and social consequences
in the region, particularly impacting countries with weaker socioeconomic
backgrounds. These challenges are harder to manage for such economies and raise
concerns about global decarbonization efforts and their impact on fossil-fuel
dependent countries. The transition to sustainable energy provides fundamental
development opportunities for the region while transitioning away from fossil
fuel dependence. Critical minerals that are needed for the transition to
renewable energy technologies are concentrated in specific countries in the
region like Australia, China, Mongolia, and Myanmar which can lead to a shift in
energy geopolitics in the region. The region encompasses diverse countries
representing different challenges and opportunities which aligns with the UNDP’s
integrated systems approach for addressing development solutions specific to
country priorities. As the UNDP Strategic Plan and the SEH’s core pillars set,
there is a need to accelerate just transition, closing the gap in energy access
and navigating energy finance in the region. In the Asia-Pacific region,
urbanization will be continuing rapidly bringing the need and action for
sustainable building and construction, clean transportation and sustainable
urban development through decarbonization. Sustainable access to critical raw
mineral resources has become part of countries’ policy agenda as demand for
these resources scales up. 34)   RBAS (Regional Bureau for Arab States) The Arab
States region has been achieving significant development over the past decades.
However, the region is highly heterogeneous in terms of development, income per
capita and contributions to GHG emissions. There are challenges in the region
setting back the transition to sustainable energy and development such as
conflict, civil unrest, war and security risks with extreme weather events
caused by climate change such as flooding, droughts and water scarcity. These
challenges, overall, affect the region’s socioeconomic growth and progress
towards SDGs. In terms of the energy mix, the Arab region is known as a key
source of exportable oil and gas in the world, but these resources eventually
will reach limits, creating energy security challenges. Yet, the region holds
potential for solar and wind power that can meet the need for stable energy
sources. Still, renewable energy capacity represents only 7% of the energy mix
in the region. As UNDP and the SEH core pillars present, sustainable energy
systems transformation can provide multiplier effects in the region by
generating employment, ensuring access to education and health care, creating
stability and enabling recovery in the region which has been faced with poverty
due to conflicts and displacements and open a pathway to link many SDGs in the
region. The displaced communities in the region are amongst the most vulnerable
communities while facing challenges in lack of energy access for meeting basic
needs and social services such as health and education. Therefore, energy
independence has a pivotal role in the region’s import-reliant countries such as
Jordan, Lebanon, Sudan, Djibouti and Palestine alongside oil and gas exporting
economies in the region such as Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya and
Saudi Arabia. Solar power expansion holds potential in the region for addressing
crisis and recovery needs in the countries that are affected by conflict, unrest
and displacement in the region. Energy priorities in the region include
decentralized energy solutions that UNDP supports through local projects to help
displaced and conflict-affected communities and provide access to electricity in
health and education services, household and sustainable irrigation systems.
Another priority in terms of the energy transition is supporting policies and
regulations to de-risking mechanisms for scaling up renewable energy
investments. 35)   SIDS (Small Island Developing States) The UNDP has a wide
range of partnerships with SIDS. Rising Up for SIDS, UNDP’s SIDS Offer
highlights working together towards advancing their national development
priorities, addressing diverse challenges and capitalizing on opportunities in
the region in line with the SAMOA Pathway and the 2030 Agenda. The region’s
distinct characteristics serve as a special case for sustainable development,
representing certain challenges such as economic challenges caused by small
geographic size, high import dependence on fuel, difficult connectivity causing
high transportation costs and social challenges caused by high unemployment and
limited service and capacity. However, SIDS is known among the most vulnerable
countries to climate change despite collectively accounting for less than 1% of
global CO2 emissions. Climate change poses existential threats towards SIDS such
as rising sea-levels, earthquakes and tsunamis, floods, ocean acidification,
loss of biodiversity, frequent droughts and volcanic eruptions. Rising sea
levels are causing threats in sea levels which threaten the tourism industry in
SIDS, the economic backbone of many countries. The SIDS Accelerated Modalities
of Action (SAMOA) Pathway is the UN framework for guiding the pathway for
sustainable development of SIDS. The Pathway recognizes the adverse effects of
climate change, sea-level rise in SIDS and their special case as they already
made progress for sustainable development, but their inherent vulnerabilities
hinder more progressive changes which cause challenges in energy transition. The
SAMOA Pathway integrates the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and aligns
three principles of sustainability – economic, social and environmental. The
Pathway emphasizes five main areas. Firstly, the Pathway commits to sustainable
development, inclusive and equitable economic growth with decent work for all
and sustainable consumption, production and transportation. Secondly, the
Pathway approaches adaptation to climate risks by developing disaster risk
reduction programs, acting on mitigation of climate change and reducing climate
risk through sustainable energy. Thirdly, the Pathway presents the importance of
oceans to the SIDS’ sustainable development and supports the protection of
oceans, sea and biodiversity and managing chemicals and water resources. Lastly,
as aligned with the UNDP Strategic Plan 2022-2025, the Pathway aims to build and
strengthen partnerships among SIDS, UN Agencies and other stakeholders to
achieve these goals. B)     Country Office Examples This chapter offers
practical examples from country offices to reinforce the core concepts
introduced in previous chapters. Scaling up development impact for country
partners within the UNDP’s system is a fundamental aspect that connects the
Energy Moonshot, the Strategic Plan 2022-2025 and the SEH’s core pillars. UNDP’s
Strategic Plan builds development offers through “3x6x3” framework which
delivers integrated development solutions by understanding country needs and
setting priorities and SEH, as an operational structure, develops catalyzing
actions and helps accelerate systems change for country offices. UNDP continues
to support delivering development in country offices through “3x6x3” framework
summarized in the Strategic Plan 2022-2025: 3 Directions of Change: structure
transformation, leaving no one behind, building resilience 6 Signature
Solutions: poverty and inequality, governance, resilience, environment, energy,
gender equality 3 Enablers: strategic innovation, digitalization, development
financing The framework drives actions to strengthen UNDP’s Energy Moonshot,
aligning with the target of supporting 500 million people to gain access to
clean, affordable and reliable energy and linked to Energy Moonshot’s
accelerators (e.g., thought leadership, digital intelligence, market
development). Market development supports green financing projects, business
models, and de-risking mechanisms to attract investments for developing an
environment for a just energy transition by reducing barriers and risks and
recognizing diverse interventions for different countries for effective
functioning markets. The following examples help to illustrate how the
principles discussed in the module translated into actions and outcomes. 36)
Example 1 – Tunisian Solar Plan Tunisian Solar Plan (TSP) is Tunisia’s official
long-term plan for attracting renewable energy investments in the electricity
sector. UNDP supported the Government of Tunisia under a Global Environment
Facility-funded project in the development of Nationally Appropriate Mitigation
Action (NAMA) for the TSP. The Plan represents Tunisia’s targets for scaling up
renewable energy investments, with a %30 renewable energy impact on the energy
generation mix. Achieving this goal requires financial investments and the
majority of this envisioned financing comes from the private sector. However,
attracting private sector investments begins with identifying and defining key
challenges, risks and barriers linked with early-stage renewable markets in
developing countries. These risks and barriers include understanding obstacles
that are holding investors back from engaging in the renewable energy market
such as regulatory barriers, political uncertainty, financial risks and high
financial costs. Therefore, once these issues are identified, research, data-
gathering and in-depth analysis are crucial for policymakers and stakeholders to
gather information about investment environment, energy landscape and potential
risk factors. These analyses support designing policy formulas and create an
environment to enable private sector renewable energy investments typically
through public instruments in one of three ways, reducing, transferring or
compensating for risks. DREI framework identifies these public instruments for
achieving risk-return profile for private investments. 37)       Example 2 – The
Africa Mini Grid Programme The Africa Mini Grid Programme (AMP) is the UNDP’s
most ambitious energy access programme, encompassing 21 African countries
initially to provide country-led technical assistance to scale up solar battery
mini grids. The program identifies and defines the critical issue of energy
access in Africa, where half of the people living in Sub Saharan Africa do not
have access to electricity. This multifaceted challenge affects the most
vulnerable communities in poverty, including rural and remote areas with limited
access to reliable electricity and grid connectivity. After identifying the
issue, data and research are important components of the programme as
policymakers need to understand the energy landscape, patterns and market. The
mini grid energy market in Africa is still just beginning which creates a
barrier to the private sector to direct their investments into the market.
Mostly, mini grid markets have investments in the form of grant and non-
commercial capital. In such an energy landscape, policies need to be designed to
enable financial mechanisms for private sector investments in solar mini grids.
Therefore, by engaging with other partners, together with Rocky Mountain
Institute (RMI) and the African Development Bank (AfDB) with GEF funding, UNDP
represents policies to increasing financial viability, promoting commercial
investment meanwhile focusing cost-reduction and innovative business models to
scaling up access to clean, affordable and reliable energy. By this policy
adoption, the solar mini grids concentrated around opportunities such as cost
effectiveness, disruptive digital models and innovative private business models.
The AMP works as an additional and complementary programme for the ongoing mini
grid market in Africa, while supporting further partnerships during the program
implementation. The program implements policies both for country specific
priorities and regional cooperations. 38)    Example 3 – Viet Nam Developing
Domestic Capital Markets UNDP has been working with country offices and other
partners to deliver integrated development solutions for sustainable energy and
development and accompanying country offices through country programmes to drive
three systemic changes (e.g., structural transformation, leaving no one behind
and building resilience). One of these sustainable development solutions is
presented by UNDP’s analysis and policy brief regarding the development of the
domestic capital market in Viet Nam. UNDP also aims to support the country
programme for Viet Nam to accelerate the achievement of SDGs by aligning the
country’s national plans and the UNDP Strategic Plan (2022-2025). The report
begins with the identification and definition of the issue of challenges on the
development of Viet Nam’s domestic capital markets. In Viet Nam, main challenge
behind economic development is that the capital market is not financing long-
term productive investment which can create financial barriers in sustainable
energy investments. Following this identified issue, the report presents
analysis of the domestic capital market, investment trends, barriers that
holding capital flow back into the financial market. In a developing country
like Viet Nam, there is a need to focus on developing domestic market to boost
long-term productive investment to support sustainable development because
borrowing from foreign sources includes risks of exchange rate which can be hard
to manage in such a developing market. Facilitating Viet Nam’s transition from
fossil fuels to sustainable energy, the demand for financial sector will
increase and there will be need for investing large share of national income to
build the capacity for growth and infrastructure for sustainable energy for
development. 39)        Example 4 – Solar for Health As highlighted in earlier
sections of this module, the health sector has a direct connection with energy
services. It necessitates reliable, cost-effective, and sustainable access to
electricity to guarantee uninterrupted health services and universal access to
healthcare facilities. Clinics, operation rooms, maternity wards, laboratories,
and medical warehouses need the power to light, operate medical services and
refrigerate vaccines. Lack of access to reliable electricity supply in health
facilities puts many lives at risk, particularly in underserved and remote
regions. One out of every four healthcare facilities in Sub-Saharan Africa
remains without access to electricity and two of every three health facilities
in low- and middle-income countries face with absence of reliable energy
services. Since 2017, UNDP’s Solar for Health initiative has aimed to connect
these two sectors – health and energy to ensure universal access to health
services while protecting the environment by helping countries with sustainable
energy solutions. Through this initiative, UNDP has supported countries to
install solar photovoltaic energy systems in health facilities located in poor
and remote areas to ensure cost-effective and reliable access to electricity for
undisrupted health services. This support also aims to mitigate climate change
impacts and align with various SDGs, such as SDG 3 (Good Health and Wellbeing)
and SDG 7 (Affordable and Clean Energy). Solar energy not only contributes to
local development by creating green job opportunities but also promotes local
manufacturing, bolsters the growth of solar market, and makes advance towards
achieving SDG 5 (Gender Equality) by providing women with training as solar
technicians to install and maintain solar panels. 40)       Example 5 – The
Energy School for Women in Peru: e-Mujer As a broader development benefit, clean
energy provides a catalyzing tool for gender equality and advancing SDG 5 and
enabling this is possible by closing the energy access gap through sustainable
energy systems transformation. UNDP’s project, e-Mujer is an energy school for
women in Peru for training to set up and commercialize clean energy
technologies. This pilot project which 290 women enrolled funded by the Global
Environment Facility and implemented by the Peruvian Ministry of Energy and
Mines and UNDP. E-mujer helps to close energy access to sustainable energy while
contributing to climate action and reducing gender inequalities which is a
critical challenge across Peru. As previously highlighted in this module, lack
of energy access disproportionately affects women and girls. Yet, the
representation of women in the energy sector from industry to policymaking
remains low. In Peru, 42% of women do not earn income. Therefore, gender
perspective-focused sustainable energy projects such as e-Mujer enable
development for communities by empowering new skills and opportunities to earn
income and facilitating daily lives at home through improved clean cooking
technologies. 41)     Example 6 – Joint Initiatives of UNDP in the partnership
with the government of Kazakhstan Funding green transition has a pivotal role in
accelerating the sustainable energy systems transformation and achieving
milestones of SDGs. Developing countries often face significant barriers to
transitioning to clean and renewable energy sources due to financial
constraints. To bridge this energy finance gap, UNDP has presented three
financial support programmes for entrepreneurs implementing energy efficiency
and renewable energy projects. Two financial programmes include partial
subsidizing of the loan of principles of projects: the UNDP Kazakhstan Project
and the Global Environment Facility (GEF) Sustainable Cities for Low Carbon
Development and the project UNDP-GEF "De-risking investments in renewable energy
sources". The other financial programme has provided the loan guarantee under
the project of UNDP and the Ministry of Industry and Infrastructure Development
of the Republic of Kazakhstan (MIID) "Creating conditions for attracting
investors for energy efficiency in Kazakhstan". As energy finance one of the
core pillars of the SEH and market development is the accelerator of the Energy
Moonshot, the DREI framework provides significant support for promoting private
sector investments in renewable energy in Kazakhstan. The economy in Kazakhstan
represents increasing demand – 69% of the generated electricity comes from
industry while coal constitutes around 55% of primary energy resources
consumption. Moreover, more than 80% of centralized heating systems use coal in
the country. All that causes high GHG emissions and Kazakhstan places in the
first ten countries in the world in terms of intensity of GHG emissions per GDP
unit. Therefore, transition into the renewable energy systems presents
opportunities for the reduction of GHG emissions alongside reducing dependence
on fossil fuels while diversifying energy sources. V)   Overview – Academy’s
Mission and Approaches This concluding chapter explores the mission and
objectives behind the creation of the Academy. The Sustainable Energy Academy is
a knowledge-sharing tool that presents several opportunities for Country
Offices, Regional Bureaus, partners, stakeholders and the sustainable energy
development community by catalyzing the acceleration of sustainable energy
systems transformation. While being a bridge between multi-sectoral sustainable
energy landscape, the Academy provides diverse approaches for capacity-building,
knowledge sharing and nurturing partnerships for the global community to lead
transformative change in the energy systems. A)   Academy’s Core Mission The
Sustainable Energy Academy’s mission lies in creating concrete impact on the
ground by providing countries with tailored made capacity building and a strong
global community of experts and practitioners on energy as enabler for
development. It is in harmony with the Sustainable Energy Hub’s three pillars
and the nexus offer which supports the core mission of the Academy. The Academy
will connect energy for development with nexus topics such as water management,
food resilience, finance, health, employment and social protection, climate and
security, and gender equality. The Energy Academy presents a learning journey to
participants by including (i) learning and training, (ii) building a community
for knowledge exchange, and (iii) generating engagements. It offers
comprehensive capacity-building programs, interactive modules, live webinars,
and discussion forums to enhance the capabilities of countries and foster cross-
learning. The academy aims at knowledge sharing by learning and training through
a modular structure that each module interconnects and stands out on specific
topics in energy simultaneously. The interactive learning process will create
dialogue and ensure the exchange of knowledge by building community. Along with
capacity building and building community, the Academy supports diverse
stakeholders to engage in energy solutions by generating engagements. B)
Approaches The Energy Academy aligns with UNDP’s energy agendas and goals.
Through this initiative, UNDP Sustainable Energy Hub seeks to contribute to the
achievement of the 2022-2025 UNDP Strategic Plan’s moonshot to support 500
million people in accessing clean, sustainable, and affordable energy and to
accelerate the energy transition. The Strategic Plan has a clear vision and
direction on going beyond projects and embracing portfolios which enables taking
an integrated systems approach focusing on country priorities. --
Integrated and portfolio approach: This approach explains how the SEH and the
academy integrate with several global agendas, including the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) and focuses on creating solutions through integrated
portfolios and programming. The portfolio approach provides multi stakeholder
engagement by promoting strategic interventions and coordination to address the
challenges of sustainable energy transformation. Portfolio approach focuses on
three key pillars: fostering sustainable energy access, fostering a sustainable
energy transition, and addressing the energy finance challenges. This approach
manages to accelerate developmental challenges by taking a systems approach,
prioritizing learning what works and what does not work on the transformation
and continuously generating portfolios for national partners. This provides
countries with the necessary knowledge and expertise to advocate for sustainable
energy solutions, inform governments about energy solutions, trends, and
implement impactful policy for projects. --   Collaborative approach – building
partnership: By aiming to build community and providing multi sectoral dialogue,
the Sustainable Energy Academy acknowledges the importance of building and
strengthening partnerships to achieve sustainable energy transformation. The
Academy engages stakeholders from diverse sectors such as health, social
protection and gender equality, climate change, digital and data, governance,
and finance, recognizing the cross-cutting nature of sustainable energy issues.
Through this engagement, the initiative strengthens collaborative efforts in
these diverse sectors through building community for knowledge exchange.
Interactive/Multimedia Element: Group Activity: Identifying and discussing how
each SEH pillar aligns with specific SDGs by assigning each group one of the SEH
pillars C)      Outline of the modules and its alignment with the SEH pillars
and nexus offer This concluding chapter of Module 1 aims to provide a clear
roadmap that outlines the topics in subsequent modules, all designed to align
with the SEH core pillars and empowering change-makers in sustainable energy
landscape and presenting challenges, opportunities and catalyzers of sustainable
energy for development. Through these modules, participants will gain practical
knowledge, skills and a deeper understanding of critical aspects of sustainable
energy systems transformation. Each module prepares participants to contribute
effectively to sustainable energy initiatives and interconnects with solutions
and opportunities to drive change. The modules are designed to be interactive
and participatory and encourage active engagement and knowledge sharing among
participants. As Module 1 presented and carried linkages through the module, the
SEH has three main pillars offers (i.e., energy access, energy transition and
energy finance) and with the SEH nexus offer (i.e., social protection, gender
equality, climate action, finance, governance, digital and data), they will
provide profound base for following modules. This module acted as an umbrella
that encompasses concepts from other modules such as energy access, renewable
energy technologies, energy efficiency, energy transition, energy policy, energy
finance, gender equality, climate change mitigation and adaptation and energy
and sustainable development nexus and provided information on how, why and what
sustainable energy for development. This integrated approach allows us to place
energy as a key enabler around various sectors, disciplines and areas such as
health, education, social protection, gender equality, governance, digital and
data, finance, climate change adaptation and mitigation. Therefore, through the
Academy, learners will gain development-centered lenses looking through the
energy with a holistic perspective. Interactive/Multimedia Elements: Final Quiz
Wrap-up Session: Recap, reflection and review of the Module 1 Group Discussion
Interactive Session: Q&A Additional Comments >Icon Description automatically
generated< footnote1) https://trackingsdg7.esmap.org/data/files/download-
documents/sdg7-report2023-full_report.pdf footnote2) https://hdr.undp.org/data-
center/human-development-index#/indicies/HDI footnote3)
https://www.iea.org/reports/renewables-2023 footnote4) https://ember-
climate.org/insights/in-brief/tripling-renewables-and-doubling-efficiency-will-
accelerate-a-fossil-phaseout/ footnote5) https://ember-climate.org/insights/in-
brief/tripling-renewables-and-doubling-efficiency-will-accelerate-a-fossil-
phaseout/ footnote6) https://www.iea.org/reports/renewables-2023/executive-
summary footnote7) https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-
outlook-2023/executive-summary footnote8) Kyayesimira, J., Muheirwe, F. Health
concerns and use of biomass energy in households: voices of women from rural
communities in Western Uganda. Energ Sustain Soc 11, 42 (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13705-021-00316-2 footnote9)
https://www.ieabioenergy.com/blog/publications/press-release-modern-bioenergy-
provides-opportunities-for-developing-countries/ footnote10) https://www.unido.o
rg/sites/default/files/files/2022-08/UNIDO_Ethanol_Summary_Report_screen.pdf
footnote11) https://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/gender-mainstreaming-climate-
change-projects-case-noor-ouarzazate-morocco footnote12)
https://www.irena.org/Energy-Transition/Technology/Solar-energy footnote13)
https://africaminigrids.org/ footnote14) https://solar-aid.org/light-a-village/
footnote15) https://www.ren21.net/wp-
content/uploads/2019/05/230607_REN21_GSR2023_Supply_Presentation.pdf footnote16)
https://www.irena.org/-
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2019/Jan/IRENA_Geothermal_agri-
food_2019.pdf footnote17) https://www.usaid.gov/energy/gender/agent-lageo-
gender-responsive-geothermal footnote18) https://mc-
cd8320d4-36a1-40ac-83cc-3389-cdn-endpoint.azureedge.net/-
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2023/Feb/IRENA_Changing_role_of_hydropower
_2023.pdf?rev=85b54f8dd8794f8fbc6270b5a1e0b92a footnote19)
https://www.ren21.net/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/GSR-2023_Energy-Supply-
Module.pdf footnote20) https://www.irena.org/Energy-Transition/Technology/Wind-
energy footnote21) https://www.irena.org/Energy-Transition/Technology/Wind-
energy footnote22) https://www.ren21.net/wp-
content/uploads/2019/05/GSR-2023_Energy-Supply-Module.pdf footnote23)
https://unfccc.int/news/wave-of-the-future footnote24)
https://www.iea.org/reports/critical-minerals-market-
review-2023/implications#abstract footnote25) https://www.ren21.net/wp-
content/uploads/2019/05/GSR2023_Demand_Modules.pdf footnote26)
https://unhabitat.org/topic/urban-energy footnote27) https://www.ren21.net/wp-
content/uploads/2019/05/GSR2023_Demand_Modules.pdf footnote28)
https://www.undp.org/cambodia/blog/how-solar-powered-water-pumps-are-boosting-
productivity-and-resilience-cambodias-farmers footnote29)
https://www.ren21.net/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/GSR2023_Demand_Modules.pdf
footnote30) Ibid. footnote31) https://www.iea.org/energy-system/transport
footnote32) https://www.irena.org/-
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2022/Jan/IRENA_Livelihood_Decentralised_Re
newables_2022.pdf?rev=7f7ca5cd9eea443483dea7987ef952e9 footnote33) https://www.i
rena.org/-
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2022/Jan/IRENA_Livelihood_Decentralised_Re
newables_2022.pdf?rev=7f7ca5cd9eea443483dea7987ef952e9 footnote34)
https://www.undp.org/energy/our-flagship-initiatives/africa-minigrids-program
footnote35) https://www.who.int/news/item/06-06-2023-basic-energy-access-lags-
amid-renewable-opportunities--new-report-shows footnote36)
https://www.iea.org/energy-system/renewables/solar-pv footnote37) https://iea.bl
ob.core.windows.net/assets/9b89065a-ccb4-404c-a53e-084982768baf/SDG7-Report2023-
FullReport.pdf footnote38) https://undp-climate.exposure.co/5-things-to-know-
about-clean-cooking footnote39) https://www.seforall.org/news/seforall-partners-
unveil-new-commitments-on-sustainable-cooling-decarbonization-and-electric
footnote40) https://undp-climate.exposure.co/5-things-to-know-about-clean-
cooking footnote41) https://www.undp.org/energy/our-work-areas/energy-
access/access-clean-cooking-solutions footnote42) https://undp-
climate.exposure.co/5-things-to-know-about-clean-cooking footnote43) https://www
.irena.org/-
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2022/Sep/IRENA_Renewable_energy_and_jobs_2
022.pdf footnote44) https://www.iea.org/news/renewable-power-on-course-to-
shatter-more-records-as-countries-around-the-world-speed-up-deployment
footnote45)
https://www.ren21.net/gsr-2023/modules/energy_supply/01_energy_supply/
footnote46) https://www.irena.org/Energy-Transition/Finance-and-
investment/Investment footnote47)
https://www.irena.org/publications/2020/Jan/RE-finance-Green-bonds footnote48)
https://ungc-communications-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/docs/publications/Practical-
Guidance-to-Issue-a-Blue-Bond.pdf footnote49)
https://www.irena.org/publications/2020/Jan/RE-finance-Sovereign-Guarantees
footnote50) https://climatechampions.unfccc.int/carbon-credits-and-the-energy-
transition-an-investor-perspective/ footnote51) https://www.unep-
wcmc.org/en/news/beyond-greenwashing-understanding-the-challenges-ambition-and-
potential-of-carbon-trading footnote52) <a
href="https://www.irena.org/Publications/2023/Nov/World-Energy-Transitions-
Outlook-2023-vol2">https://www.irena.org/Publications/2023/Nov/World-Energy-
Transitions-Outlook-2023-vol2</a> footnote53) https://www.undp.org/energy/our-
work-areas/energy-social-protection footnote54) https://www.undp.org/energy/our-
work-areas/energy-and-gender-equality footnote55)
https://www.iea.org/commentaries/women-in-senior-management-roles-at-energy-
firms-remains-stubbornly-low-but-efforts-to-improve-gender-diversity-are-moving-
apace footnote56) https://genderequalitystrategy.undp.org/ footnote57)
https://www.unicef.org/wash/water-scarcity footnote58)
https://www.unicef.org/press-releases/unicef-collecting-water-often-colossal-
waste-time-women-and-girls Define what time poverty means footnote59)
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_SYR_SPM.pdf
footnote60) https://www.preventionweb.net/publication/wmo-global-annual-decadal-
climate-update-target-years-2023-2027# footnote61)
https://library.wmo.int/idviewer/68585/4 footnote62)
https://www.un.org/en/climatechange/science/causes-effects-climate-change
footnote63) https://www.un.org/en/climatechange/science/causes-effects-climate-
change# footnote64) https://essd.copernicus.org/articles/14/4811/2022/
footnote65) https://news.un.org/en/story/2023/07/1139162 footnote66)
https://www.unep.org/news-and-stories/press-release/governments-plan-produce-
double-fossil-fuels-2030-15degc-warming footnote67) <a href="https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.erss.2016.08.013">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2016.08.013</a>
footnote68) <a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2019.01.008">https://doi.org
/10.1016/j.erss.2019.01.008</a> footnote69) https://ember-
climate.org/insights/research/global-electricity-review-2023/ footnote70)
https://ember-climate.org/insights/research/tracking-national-ambition-towards-
a-global-tripling-of-renewables/ footnote71) https://www.iea.org/reports/world-
energy-outlook-2023/executive-summary footnote72) Liu, J., Hull, V., Godfray,
H.C.J. et al. Nexus approaches to global sustainable development. Nat Sustain 1,
466–476 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-018-0135-8 footnote73)
https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2023/executive-summary
footnote74) https://news.un.org/en/story/2023/12/1144267 footnote75)
https://www.reuters.com/sustainability/china-set-up-solar-wind-recycling-system-
waste-volumes-surge-2023-08-17/ footnote76)
https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/sustainability/publications/assets/pwc-wef-scaling-up-
energy-access-through-cross-sector_partnerships.pdf footnote77)
https://www.iea.org/reports/scaling-up-private-finance-for-clean-energy-in-
emerging-and-developing-economies/executive-summary footnote78)
https://www.iea.org/commentaries/access-to-electricity-improves-slightly-
in-2023-but-still-far-from-the-pace-needed-to-meet-sdg7 footnote79)
https://www.iea.org/reports/financing-clean-energy-in-africa footnote80)
https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/16/16/6075 footnote81)
https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/16/9/3805 footnote82) https://www.undp.org/sites/
g/files/zskgke326/files/2023-
05/Global%20Decarbonization%20in%20Fossil%20Fuel%20Export-
Dependent%20Economies.pdf footnote83) Giray Gozgor, Sudharshan Reddy Paramati,
Does energy diversification cause an economic slowdown? Evidence from a newly
constructed energy diversification index, Energy Economics, Volume 109, 2022, <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2022.105970">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ene
co.2022.105970</a>. footnote84) https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/fil
es/2023-05/Global%20Decarbonization%20in%20Fossil%20Fuel%20Export-
Dependent%20Economies.pdf footnote85) https://www.iea.org/energy-
system/decarbonisation-enablers/digitalisation footnote86)
https://www.iea.org/commentaries/why-ai-and-energy-are-the-new-power-couple
footnote87) https://www.undp.org/digital/blog/three-pathways-undp-leveraging-
digital-technology-achieve-climate-goals footnote88) Tzu-Ling Chen, Hung-Wen
Cheng, Applying traditional knowledge to resilience in coastal rural villages,
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, Volume 47, 2020, 101564, <a hr
ef="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2020.101564">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr
.2020.101564</a> footnote89) Prosumers are energy consumers with a dual role as
a producer-consumer which they can participate in producing, storing, and
selling their electricity through renewable technologies such as peer-to-peer
energy trading (P2P). footnote90) N. Bekirsky, C.E. Hoicka, M.C. Brisbois, L.
Ramirez Camargo, Many actors amongst multiple renewables: A systematic review of
actor involvement in complementarity of renewable energy sources, Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews, Volume 161, 2022, <a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.rser.2022.112368">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2022.112368</a>. footnote91)
https://www.undp.org/energy/our-flagship-initiatives/derisking-renewable-energy-
investment-framework footnote92)
https://www.undp.org/africa/waca/publications/undps-renewed-strategic-offer-
africa-africas-promise footnote93) https://au.int/en/agenda2063/overview
footnote94) https://au.int/en/pressreleases/20220722/africa-speaks-unified-
voice-au-executive-council-adopts-african-common#:~:text=The%20African%20Common%
20Position%20encourages,the%20ambitions%20of%20Agenda%202063. footnote95)
https://www.worldbank.org/en/results/2021/04/14/promoting-climate-change-action-
in-latin-america-and-the-caribbean footnote96)
https://www.imf.org/en/Blogs/Articles/2023/06/27/caribbean-climate-crisis-
demands-urgent-action-by-governments-and-investors footnote97)
https://www.undp.org/energy/where-we-work/latin-america-and-caribbean
footnote98) https://www.undp.org/arab-states/stories/unleash-power-renewable-
energy-arab-region footnote99)
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/migration/bb/undp-
bb-2-Pager_SIDS-Offer-Rising-Up-for-SIDS.pdf footnote100)
https://www.un.org/ohrlls/sites/www.un.org.ohrlls/files/samoa_pathway.pdf
footnote101) https://www.un.org/ohrlls/content/about-small-island-developing-
states footnote102)
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2021-09/UNDP-Strategic-
Plan-2022-2025_1.pdf footnote103) https://www.undp.org/energy/publications/drei-
tunisia footnote104) https://www.undp.org/energy/our-flagship-
initiatives/africa-minigrids-program footnote105)
https://www.undp.org/vietnam/publications/developing-domestic-capital-markets-
boost-viet-nams-sustainable-development footnote106)
https://www.undp.org/energy/our-flagship-initiatives/solar-for-health
footnote107) https://undp-climate.exposure.co/empowered-women footnote108)
https://www.undp.org/kazakhstan/projects/de-risking-renewable-energy-investment