Energy Governance Module Contents Overview      2 Context       2 UNDP’s Energy
Governance Framework    3 Learning Objectives   5 Focus Area 1: Inclusive and
effective Institutions    6 From whole-of-government to whole-of society  6
Transparency, public confidence and trust in institutions     7 Key actions to
foster inclusive and effective institutions    12 Focus Area 2: Policy and
regulatory framework        13 Political economy of the energy transition   13
Stakeholder engagement       16 Policy coherence     18 Foresight    21
Adaptative policies and regulations  23 De-risking renewable energy investments
25 Key actions for a policy and regulatory framework    26 Focus Area 3: Civic
engagement and empowerment       27 Access to quality, reliable and
understandable information   27 Facilitating cooperation with a heterogeneous
Civil Society  28 Key actions for civic engagement and empowerment     31 Focus
Area 4: Appropriate oversight  33 Effective oversight  33 Agile oversight
34 Key actions for appropriate oversight        36 Module Wrap-Up       37 Key
messages 37 What’s next? 37 References   39 Overview Context As the impacts of
climate change are evermore constant and pronounced, energy governance stands as
an anchor for achieving the imperative of a sustainable development for
countries and societies. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) is
uniquely positioned to support countries in their transformative journey on
energy transition through shaping and strengthening their energy governance
system . Energy access in any country is fundamentally tied to the governance.
The selection of an energy source, its production and consumption, and the
stakeholders involved all carry significant governance implications. The
outcomes and beneficiaries of such decisions are shaped by the governance
structures in place, whether on a global, national, provincial, community, or
household scale. Inclusivity and accountability must be at the core of the
governance system. Inclusivity ensures that the benefits of the energy
transition reach all citizens, particularly those most vulnerable and
marginalised. Accountability ensures that commitments are upheld and that
authorities are responsive to the needs of the people they serve. Box 1. What is
energy access? Energy access generally refers to reliable and affordable access
to modern energy carriers and end-use services for households and communities.
More specifically, it may be defined as having “access to clean cooking
facilities, a first connection to electricity, and then an increasing level of
electricity consumption over time”. Beyond access to the sources of energy
themselves, this definition includes access to the means of energy generation,
energy end-use services and equipment for the consumption of energy. Box 2. What
is governance? UNDP defines governance as “the system of values, policies, and
institutions by which a society manages its economic, political, and social
affairs through interactions within and among the state, civil society, and
private sector. It is the way a society organizes itself to make and implement
decisions—achieving mutual understanding, agreement, and action”. Today, the
world is grappling with a monumental and unprecedented challenge: the
consequences of climate change primarily driven by excessive fossil fuel
consumption. In parallel, over 675 million people remain without electricity
access, and a staggering 2.3 billion lack clean cooking facilities, with the
majority in Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia. In this context, UNDP is
committed to bringing unprecedented partnerships and actions to help 500 million
additional people gain clean energy access by 2025 and further accelerating the
transition to clean, reliable, and affordable energy for all. Closing the gap on
energy access so that marginalized people and communities gain access to
sustainable energy and the dignity and opportunities it brings, and accelerating
a just energy transition from fossil fuels through system changes that support a
green recovery are at the centre of UNDP’s commitment. Box 3. What is a just
energy transition? The energy transition is a process of replacing fossil fuels
with low or zero-carbon energy sources. It’s a long-term structural change of
the energy system. The term ‘just’ ensures that all people are at the centre of
the transition process. It emphasizes the critical importance of leaving no one
behind, bringing people out of poverty, reducing social inequalities, supporting
human rights, and serving the wider public interest. For the first time in over
30 years, the Human Development Index has seen a decline as a growing number of
people have been pushed into poverty and have experienced widened inequality, in
a global crisis exacerbated by events such as Covid-19 and the war in Ukraine.
The energy transition also comes at a time with high levels of social and
political polarization in many societies characterised by significant
disinformation and distrust in science and governments. In this context,
achieving a just energy transition through effective, accountable, and inclusive
energy governance is essential for addressing urgent national development
priorities, environmental concerns, protecting human rights, and maintaining
social stability. While past energy transitions have been driven by the need of
growing economies for cheaper and more efficient energy sources, the energy
transition of the 21st century is different: it is mainly driven by the urgent
need and global commitment to reduce greenhouse gas emissions while addressing
the lack of reliable and affordable energy access for fragile populations. This
entails the need to reduce the use of fossil fuels, end fossil fuel subsidies,
augment sustainable energy investments, increase the production of renewables,
improve efficiency of energy storage, enhance energy efficiency, electrify
different sectors, and expand the use of alternative greener fuels. Numerous
factors — from global interdependencies and technological disparities to
transboundary dynamics, dependencies on critical raw materials, and potential
for manipulation — will shape the possibility of a fair energy transition. The
energy transition will bring disruptive changes that will impact people
differently, especially marginalized and vulnerable populations. Ensuring the
transition is just, inclusive, and accountable, is critical, and mitigating its
unintended impacts, particularly in developing regions with concentrated
industrialization and development, is crucial. UNDP’s Energy Governance
Framework Strong, inclusive, and accountable energy systems are critical for
addressing the complex energy and sustainability challenges of the 21st century.
While countries’ experiences with energy transition highlight a plethora of
technological solutions for decarbonizing societies, the predominant challenge
often lies in the governance aspects tied to these transitions. Effective energy
governance requires a purpose-driven, risk-informed, and people-responsive
system that maximizes impact while minimizing risks and uncertainties. Box 4.
What is energy governance? Energy governance is the exercise of economic,
political, and social authority to manage the spatial planning, production,
transmission, distribution, storage, access to and use of energy. It includes
the ways by which decisions are made about where and how energy resources are
developed, regulated, and consumed. It comprises the mechanisms, processes, and
institutions through which governments, people, communities, and corporations
articulate their interests, exercise their legal rights, meet their obligations,
and mediate their differences in relation to energy. Not all systems of
governance are equally fit for purpose to advance a just energy transition. The
Principles of Effective Energy Governance for Sustainable Development provide
useful guidance for strengthening governance systems through three main
governance principles and 11 sub-principles (See Table 1), providing a useful
framework to identify key governance entry points to strengthen inclusion,
accountability, and effectiveness in energy systems. These points inform the
structure of this module, as each focus area will provide tools and approaches
to ensure that all principles inform future (and current) energy governance
approaches. Table 1: Principles for Effective Governance for Sustainable
Development Effectiveness Accountability Inclusiveness Competence Sound policy
making Collaboration Integrity Transparency Independent oversight Leaving no one
behind Non-discrimination Participation Subsidiarity Intergenerational equity
Drawing from these principles and its extensive governance expertise, UNDP’s
Energy Governance Framework for a just energy transition prioritises four
programming focus areas together with four critical approaches essential for
strengthening energy governance, as shown in the table below. Table 2: UNDP
Energy Governance Framework, Focus Areas, and Critical Approaches Focus Areas
Critical Approaches 1)     Inclusive and effective institutions 2) Legal and
regulatory frameworks 3)      Civic engagement and empowerment 4)
Appropriate and independent oversight 1)        Inclusive and people-centred
approach that engages all stakeholders’ rights, perspectives, needs and
aspirations. 2)    Multi-level governance approaches that encourage
collaboration between various government levels but also across different
sectors and actors. 3)       Digitally enabled approaches that accelerate the
energy transition through technology-driven solutions that also enhance
efficiency, effectiveness, and transparency in governance processes. 4)
Flexible and adaptive approaches that respond to the risks and uncertainties and
ever-changing nature of the energy landscape. Critical to achieve carbon
neutrality, energy transition commitments and policies can have significant
affects for all parts of society and, likewise, require action and collaboration
from all stakeholders across sectors and administrative levels. But while the
opportunities and challenges (the ‘what’) of a green transition are becoming
clearer, there is much less experience and guidance on how best to go about them
(the ‘how’). This module presents the 4 focus areas from the UNDP’s Energy
Governance Framework as a guideline for energy governance interventions and
reforms. In doing so, it provides a set of case studies and examples to support
decision-makers and active players in fostering a just energy transition through
strong, inclusive, and accountable energy governance systems. Learning
Objectives 1) Understand what energy governance is and how it can act as enabler
in achieving energy access and accelerating a just energy transition. 2)
Identify and describe four focus areas of the UNDP Energy Governance Framework
along with some examples and recommendations; 3) Learn about four critical
cross-cutting approaches crucial for these focus areas. 4)    Learn about the
stakeholder engagement, political economy understanding, policy coherence,
adaptive regulations, de-risking and other critical aspects of governance. i 5)
6) 7) Focus Area 1: Inclusive and effective Institutions Inclusive and effective
institutions are essential for strong governance systems. Despite the growing
important of non-state actors, governments still bear the primary responsibility
for steering a just energy transition, balancing commitments with economic
viability and social equity. Whole-of-government and Whole-of society
Governments and state actors are responsible for leading the implementation of
national commitments to a just energy transition. They serve as convenors of
social dialogues and other forms of formal and informal consultation mechanisms,
bringing together the interests of a broader society, including those of
marginalised groups, youth, and women. Moreover, governments act as regulators,
shaping industrial, climate, energy, and labour market policies to ensure the
right environment for competition, innovation, and fairness. They can also
function as investors, maintain ownership of relevant state enterprises and
infrastructure, and stand as employers for public sector workers engaged in the
energy transition. Table 3: Broad roles of Government in Energy Governance
Vision and Implementation: Providing the vision, goals, and policy mechanisms
for implementing national commitments . Engagement: Bringing together the
interests of broader society through consultation and dialogue as well as co-
creation mechanisms. Regulation: Regulating the market to ensure competition,
innovation, and fairness. Investment: Invest in the energy transition, through
ownership of relevant state enterprises and infrastructure development. Public
institutions, especially core ministries and departments such as the ministries
of energy, environment, education, finance, employment, rural affairs, gender
need to have sufficient capacities and capabilities to come together to develop
coherent joined up policies and initiatives. A more coordinated approach across
the entire government (i.e. a whole-of-government approach), including at
different levels, is paramount to support comprehensive, just energy transition
policies and addressing interconnected issues. While the role of the state is
undeniably vital, the impact of non-state actors in realizing a just energy
transition should not be underestimated. Adopting a comprehensive approach that
encompasses both whole-of-government and whole-of-society perspectives is
essential. Box 5. Who are the key actors involved in energy governance? The
shift from “government” to “governance” is accompanied by the development of
multi-level governance frameworks. This term refers not to the traditional sense
of a top-down hierarchical governance system from the international to the local
levels, but rather to the interaction and continuous negotiation between various
levels and actors, both vertically and horizontally, across policy fields. The
trend towards multi-level governance is seen as a consequence of the
decentralisation of central government tasks and authority to local government,
the transfer of powers to the international level, and the new role of private
and societal actors in policy formulation and implementation. The scheme below
provides a non-exhaustive scheme of the key actors engaged in multi-level energy
governance: --    In energy governance, national governments are often
responsible for policy development and coordination. --    Regulatory
institutions, on the other hand, ensure market oversight and consumer
protection, among other tasks. --      Depending on their jurisdiction, local
authorities may also engage in policymaking at the local level, as well as in
the implementation of national policies. --        In some contexts, private
sector and civil society actors may also participate in policy implementation.
Moreover, they have a key role in exercising policy advocacy and oversight tasks
to ensure governmental policies meet the needs of broader society. -- Finally,
development partners and international organisations influence the actions of
governments through financing and policy diffusion and often also provide
support to non-state actors. Transparency, public confidence and trust in
institutions Considering the key role of the state in fostering a just energy
transition, public confidence and trust in institutions are fundamental. On the
one hand, governments’ ability to prevent and address corruption is crucial.
Countries with cumbersome and opaque bureaucracies and weak institutions must
conduct transition corruption risk mapping to identify and tackle corruption. On
the other hand, open and transparent institutions, strengthened by effective
mechanisms for sharing information to the broader audience, are essential to
rebuild trust in institutions. Box 6. How to improve public confidence and trust
in institutions and tackle corruption risks? For over a decade, UNDP has led the
integration of anti-corruption practices in key development areas and has
supported the Global Portal on Anti-Corruption for Development – a one-stop-shop
providing information and tools to aid development practitioners, governments,
researchers, and civil society organisations worldwide. The urgency of climate
change and the increased investment in adaptation in mitigation in developing
countries, including through the financing of the energy transition, show that
it is imperative that these funds are spent effectively and not be diminished or
lost through corruption. Maximising the effectiveness of climate finance must
include steps to reduce the potential for corruption, as large influxes of
resources coupled with an imperative to spend can create conditions ripe for
corruption. Key corruption risks in climate change adaptation and mitigation, at
the country level, include: (i) state capture and abuse of discretion in the
process of policy planning, resulting in prioritisation of projects and
programmes favouring vested interests rather than the most vulnerable groups and
areas; (ii) bribery, clientelism and cronyism in design and procurement, leading
to poor quality, incomplete and potentially maladaptive projects and programmes;
and (iii) petty corruption in the delivery of projects and programmes,
increasing the cost and reducing the effectiveness of adaptation activities.
While corruption risks in climate finance are considerable, there is much that
can be done to reduce them by adopting strategies to promote transparency,
consolidate funding, engage stakeholders, involve local communities, and ensure
adequate monitoring, reporting and verification. Key recommendations include: --
The need to avoid fragmentation of funding, which can itself create
opportunities for corruption; --    The need to encourage developing countries
to ratify and implement global and regional anticorruption instruments, such as
the United Nations Convention Against Corruption (UNCAC); -- The importance of
carrying out corruption risk assessments in order to ascertain the condition of
the general governance framework in the country concerned, and to tailor the
anti-corruption measures to the country circumstances; --        The
desirability of using multi-stakeholder accountability mechanisms to improve
transparency and accountability in designing, implementing and monitoring
adaptation; --       The importance of providing capacity-building to administer
the funds anticipated to arrive, and strengthen systems for public financial
management and procurement; -- The need to strengthen the capacity of civil
society to participate and play a ‘watchdog’ role and the need to establish
independent recourse and complaints mechanisms to improve transparency and
accountability; --  The need to support anti-corruption bodies to build their
capacity so that they can raise awareness and can develop and implement
preventive mechanisms such as system audits, and are able to investigate and
monitor corruption cases; --     The need to strengthen transparency and
accountability of local governance institutions and systems. Case Study 1: How
UNDP is supporting enhanced transparency in climate change and Energy Governance
Before and after the Paris Agreement, UNDP has worked with 126 developing
countries to improve their transparency in line with the Modalities, Procedures
and Guidelines (MPGs). This support originated from numerous global programmes
and bilateral donor-supported projects, such as the Low Emission Capacity
Development Programme (2011-2018), the NDC Support Programme (2017-2023), the
Climate Compromise (2019-) and several Global Environment Facility projects.
Figure 1: UNDP helped 126 countries to enhance transparency, between 2015 and
2022. Many countries face challenges in ensuring that information and other
material produced under transparency reporting is widely distributed and
understood by stakeholders and the public. One common activity that countries
undertake for information dissemination is developing or improving online
platforms (sometimes called “climate portals”) that publicly share related
information about climate change. This includes national GHG emissions,
mitigation and adaptation measures and their progress, climate-relevant policies
and plans and government activities, including in those related to energy
transition. An essential part of national-level transparency is the general
public’s knowledge about climate change and related government actions. In
addition to online platforms, governments address this by coordinating public
awareness campaigns and using strategies involving live events or media
productions. Uruguay: MRV tracking visualization platform During the development
of its Third Biennial Update Report, Uruguay implemented a domestic Monitoring,
Reporting and Verification (MRV) system in the form of a database of policies
and measures, relevant emissions reductions or avoided emissions, and
information on adaptation, technology transfer, financing, capacity-building,
and mitigation (UNDP, 2022). Also included in the system are technical sheets
and methodologies that define indicators towards the implementation of different
measures. In June 2019, a visualization platform was created and made publicly
available on the Ministry of Environment website to inform Uruguayan citizens of
the progress made towards the goal for each measure, its contribution to the
National Climate Change Policy, and the SDGs, as well as a classification on
each measure’s gender sensitivity (Carla Zilli, n.d.). This platform was
developed by the Uruguay government, with user-friendliness in mind, and kept up
to date with new data added by sectoral ministries (UNDP, 2022d). Continual
engagement of stakeholders and public availability of transparent climate
change-related information still needs to be improved across countries. The
following support needs have been identified: --    Dedicated communications and
engagement capacity for public awareness (e.g., knowledgeable communications
staff). --    Support utilizing more channels for broader communications and
engagement, including developing more public and classroom-relatable content, in
both digital and printed form so that all communities with different levels of
access can be reached. --        Encourage increased engagement and local
ownership, involve youth, women and marginalized groups in the early stages of
production and publication of climate change related information and its
dissemination. --      Translate information into formats that can easily be
understood at the grassroots level, and in a language that different
stakeholders groups understand. This may require different versions of materials
within the same information campaign. Access to reliable information and
ensuring data quality, both internally and externally, are also critical when
developing an effective energy transition. Energy policy modelling and planning
should be informed by data and analytics covering key governance factors such as
institutional effectiveness, the rule of law, transparency, political economy,
and civic engagement. By integrating these crucial elements, policymakers can
create comprehensive and sustainable energy strategies that account for the
broader societal context and ensure effective implementation and public support.
Key actions to foster inclusive and effective institutions 1. Capacitate
government (at all levels) to move from a sector-based approach to a systems-
based approach. 2. Develop anti-corruption laws, practices, and guidelines in
the renewable energy sector to deter corruption and penalize wrongdoings. 3.
Ensure existence of quality data and information on which energy policy is
based. 4. Take a whole-of-society approach and mobilize multi-stakeholder
partnerships for collective action by promoting access to information and
participation. Focus Area 2: Policy and regulatory framework While the general
goal of an energy transition is evident, achieving it involves diverse
approaches and potential lack of consensus. In the context of multi-level
governance, the design of energy policy and regulations is shaped by intricate
interactions among industrial players, political groups, and broader society.
Understanding the impact of these political economy factors is essential for
effective formulation and implementation of clean energy policies and
regulations. Political economy of the energy transition Box 7. What to consider
when performing an institutional and context analysis? A policy or development
programme succeeds when key players have an incentive to make it succeed. When a
society’s key actors are threatened by a development programme, they have an
incentive to make it fail. Understanding how different actors in society have
different incentives to enable or block development interventions is key to
successful programming. Illustrating this mixture of incentives and constraints
is the aim of Institutional and Context Analysis (ICA) at the country level. The
term “institutional and context analysis” refers to analyses that focus on
political and institutional factors, as well as processes concerning the use of
national and external resources in a given setting and how these have an impact
on the implementation of programmes and policies. ICA is conceptually grounded
in a set of assumptions of how development works, from which we derive
distinctive ICA questions that inform processes of institutional and context
analysis: 1)        Development requires a change in power relations and/or
incentive systems. Groups establish systems that protect their privileges.
Actors are thus expected to support changes in the socioeconomic and political
order only when they do not challenge their own privileges, whereas many
development and policy interventions (such as is the case of energy transition
policies) seek exactly such change. One thus needs to ask: a) Over history,
under what conditions have these societal actors made strides forward in human
development (or in the policy field under analysis)? 2)    The powerful reward
their supporters before anyone else. ICA focuses on the logic of political
survival, according to which those in power must reward those who support them
before anyone else. Hence, a)     On whom do the powerful rely on to keep them
in power? 3)       All actors in society have interests and incentives. Rather
than assume that everyone in society is in support of change, ICA assumes that
some actors face incentives that potentially create conflict between their
private and public interests. Broad groups (such as Civil Society or
Industrialists) often have opposing interest, as do groups within those
categories. Rather than enquiring about “political will”, we should instead ask:
a)  What incentives exist for major actors to put public interests over their
private interests? 4) Resources shape incentives. Sources of revenue shape the
incentives of power holders to be more responsive to some groups than others. We
must then ask: a)     On what resources do the powerful depend, and how does the
proposed policy change affect this? 5)       But all stakeholders in society
have constraints. The mere presence of an incentive does not mean an ability to
act on that incentive. Traditions and institutions, both formal and informal,
shape actors’ ability to act on their incentives. Therefore, a)   What are the
constraints on the power of key actors, and are there important informal rules
that shape the nature of development? ICA can help UNDP Country Offices,
policymakers, and other development stakeholders to become more strategic in
their engagement with different actors and sectors. It does so by providing a
framework for understanding the incentives and constraints that frequently pit
social actors against one another, and against proposed interventions. Rather
than undertaking situation analyses that rely on vague notions of political
will, ICA focuses instead on how some actors stand to lose if a development
programme is successful, informing decision-makers on how to reframe incentives
and mitigate the risks associated with policy proposals. Case Study 2:
Institutional and Context Analysis in practice In its simplest form, an ICA can
be used to investigate why specific laws are not applied or policies not
implemented in a given country in spite of any formal commitments and statements
that may exist, and what realistically be can be done about it as part of UN
support. An ICA can be useful to support implementation of a particular SDG/SDG
accelerator, or a combination of them, by first of all helping to identify the
gaps between formal rules such as laws or regulations (or how things should work
in theory) and informal ones (how things really work in practice), and to map
those elements influencing the status quo. These could be political factors,
cultural practices, or a general bias in the application of legislation favoring
or neglecting one geographical region or ethnic group. Sri Lanka: Added-value of
ICA for SDG implementation In Sri Lanka, an ICA was carried out as part of the
preparation for an inter-agency Mainstreaming, Acceleration and Policy Support
(MAPS) mission. The UNDP Sri Lanka Country Office identified the following
question as its focus: “What are the main challenges to horizontal and vertical
coordination with regard to SDG implementation?” The analysis found that
challenges in horizontal and vertical coordination have their root causes in the
country’s current political circumstances, in which the President and Prime
Minister are known as the two ‘centres of power’. In Sri Lanka the main
challenge is the multitude of government bodies at national and sub-national
levels with overlapping mandates related to SDG coordination and implementation.
This serves an important purpose: the entire governance system, dysfunctional as
it may have seemed at first sight, is based on a delicate balance of power which
has prevented the country from sliding back to the civil conflict and
instability that marked its recent history. The ICA showed what the Sri Lankan
government had already done to begin implementing the 2030 Agenda and based on
the information collected during the mission, the analysis concluded that there
are no easy fixes for SDG coordination in Sri Lanka. As long as there are two
‘centres of power’, there is a high likelihood that effective coordination for
SDG policy implementation at the central and sub-national levels will remain
elusive. Recommendations for the UNCT therefore included providing a channel of
communication between civil society and government counterparts on the SDGs,
which had been lacking thus far, as well as responding to the high demand by
national counterparts for information on how the 2030 Agenda is being
implemented elsewhere. The ICA also recommended looking closely at existing
efforts to coordinate SDG implementation in Sri Lanka to allow the UNCT to
manage government expectations in terms of the support it can offer. UNDP
provides guidelines on practical issues to be considered when performing an ICA:
--       Timing and timeframe: Ensure that the timing of the analysis is
synchronized with the its intended application. Lack of follow-up on the
findings of an analysis may be because the analysis was not aligned with the
relevant strategic or programming processes. The analysis report can therefore
be left aside and quickly become outdated, particularly in crisis-affected
countries or countries undergoing transitions. An ICA has no specific duration,
but most analyses will require data collection on site ranging from 5 to 10
working days of full-time work. Costs will depend on whether the consultant(s)
involved is/are hired locally or internationally, and whether travel is
required. -- Buy-in and ownership: Identify in advance the actors whose buy-in
is essential in following up the analysis and ensure that they are involved in
the process. In some cases, follow-up depends on key actors. If they have not
been involved in the analysis, or even in the design or the planning process,
they may not feel the ownership needed to ensure that its recommendations are
carried forward. --  Handling sensitive information: Have a clear strategy to
deal with findings that may be politically sensitive for the government or other
actors. Because ICA includes questions related to the distribution of power and
resources, the findings of the analysis can be very sensitive. Given that
potential, the analysis should be closely monitored by a UN official who can
oversee all stages of the process from planning to completion. The UNCT should
be able to explain the purpose of the analysis to national stakeholders when
requested, in a way that highlights the value of the exercise from the
perspective of allowing greater effectiveness and ensuring that the UN System’s
efforts are contributing to the policy prioritised of the country in question.
--   Output from an ICA: Define in advance what kind of output is expected. The
output of an ICA can be a debrief, workshop or report – or a combination of
these. Workshops may be more suitable than reports to ensure that stakeholder
engagement strategies are communicated and task forces are formed to implement
them. Because an ICA will typically produce sensitive information, it is up to
the agency or agencies that commissioned the report to decide whether, and how,
to share the findings, externally. To prioritise the broader public interest,
legal and regulatory frameworks should seek a delicate balance to address power
asymmetries and serve the goals and interests of people, communities,
government, and industry with complete transparency and impartiality. This
transformation is imperative not only for intrinsic reasons like fairness, human
rights, and social justice but also for instrumental reasons, such as securing
public support, fostering buy-in, ensuring effectiveness, and promoting long-
term sustainability. Stakeholder engagement Policies must thus be developed
through an informed and genuinely participatory co-designed process, ensuring
that diverse stakeholders have access to relevant and accessible information. To
facilitate such inclusive consultations and improve stakeholder engagement,
UNDP's inclusive consultation checklist can serve as a valuable guide. UN DESA
and UNDP have also developed an analytical framework which can be a helpful tool
to help improve stakeholder engagement, foster dialogue, and support the sharing
of lessons learned and good practices. The box below provides an example of key
principles to be considered in stakeholder engagement. Box 8. How to foster
dialogue and improve stakeholder engagement in energy governance? Engaging with
stakeholders in a transparent, systematic, and non-discriminatory manner adds
several benefits to policymaking and governance. First, greater transparency and
involvement of stakeholders enhances trust, policy acceptance and local
ownership, which are essential for policy success and sustainability. Second, it
provides the means to consider the perceptions of people who may be affected or
have an interest in a policy or project, thereby improving design and
implementation and avoiding or reducing adverse impacts. Third, it is an
essential component of risk management, by enhancing the perception of the risks
related to both the environment and the groups and individuals affected by
policies, as well as to the companies or institutions involved. Good
consultation and stakeholder engagement represent an investment. While this may
be seen by some as a cost or delaying factor, inadequate community engagement
and stakeholder consultations can lead to far higher costs than those of the
initial effort. While each policy and project are different, making it difficult
to propose a “one size fits all” template for stakeholder engagement, ten key
principles must be considered, not as pro forma, but as guidelines for genuine
consideration of stakeholders’ views and concerns in decisions related to policy
planning and implementation: 1)    The stakeholder consultation process should
be ongoing and iterative throughout the policy cycle, starting as early as
possible. 2)     It should ensure that different categories of stakeholders are
represented and involved, considering the intricate political economy factors
that shape the policy context. 3)  It should be equitable and non-
discriminatory, to ensure that vulnerable groups are not disproportionately
impacted by policy decisions. 4)     Enough resources should be allocated to
stakeholder engagement. Authorities must consider proper budgeting, staffing and
capacity to meaningfully engage with stakeholder views and necessary
modifications in the design and implementation of policies. 5)    The engagement
process should be transparent and based on factual information, including about
the scope of consultation and ability of stakeholders to influence policy
decisions. 6)  Stakeholders should have prior information about relevant aspects
of proposed policies, in a language, format, and manner that is appropriate,
clear, and accessible. 7)        Consultation events and other means of
stakeholder engagement should be respectful and free of intimidation and
coercion, as well as easily accessible. 8)      Confidentiality of information
and stakeholders should be provided when requested or necessary. 9)      To be
meaningful, a consultation process should also be respectful of participants’
time and resources by avoiding consultation for consultation’s own sake. 10)
The consultation process should be systematically documented and relevant
aspects of it should be disclosed publicly, while respecting applicable laws and
institutional requirements. These principles inform a set of key actions to be
considered throughout the policy cycle, as seen in the picture below: >A diagram
of a project Description automatically generated with medium confidence< Case
Study 4: Effective stakeholder engagement practices in Energy Governance Example
of mechanisms for stakeholder engagement in energy policy, can be more than one
format (ex. One in identification stage, another in implementation stage, etc.)
Policy coherence Promoting policy coherence in the energy sector is vital for
achieving an effective and just energy transition. It involves aligning various
energy policies, regulations, and strategies to ensure they complement each
other and work synergistically towards common goals. Through integrating various
initiatives—from renewable energy expansion and energy efficiency to emissions
curtailment and fiscal policies—and recognizing intersections with domains like
land, water, food, health, poverty alleviation, gender equality, and education,
policy coherence champions a comprehensive strategy for energy transition. This
requires better coordination among different government departments, private
sectors, and other stakeholders, facilitating a more streamlined and efficient
implementation process. Box 9. What is policy coherence? Policy coherence is
critical for addressing interactions between economic, social, and environmental
areas in a balanced manner, while avoiding negative spillovers. Policy coherence
is underpinned by the availability of the right data, mechanisms for information
exchange, and the required capacities and governance processes to enable swift
action between institutions and sectors. A lack of policy coherence across
sectors and levels of government risks leading to a fragmented government
action, with inefficiency, overlaps and duplication and higher costs for
governance actions. The UN Environment Programme has proposed a set of
mechanisms to measure and enhance policy coherence, with a focus on promoting
policy coherence for sustainable development across eight components: 1)
Institutionalisation of political commitment is likely to promote policy
coherence for sustainable development by instilling a culture of policy
coherence and guiding action towards it at all levels of government. Political
commitment at the highest political level, as an initial step, is likely to
trigger the establishment and/or the enhancement of other mechanisms that
enhance policy coherence for sustainable development. 2)  Long-term
considerations in decision-making, through mechanisms which ensure that
decision-making, policy development and planning follow objectives that are long
term (i.e., span beyond the current electoral cycle and consider the interests
of future generations). This mechanism ensures that decisions are informed by
long-term effects and perspectives, rather than only focusing on short term
gains or issues. 3) Inter-ministerial and cross-sectoral coordination ensures
policy coherence by bringing together ministries and other governmental entities
that are the most relevant for energy governance have a specific central
coordination body of focal points in different ministries to enhance policy
coherence and avoid overlaps. This mechanism should also enable the government
to periodically address and mitigate the impact of policies in one sector on
another sector to the extent possible and address the trade-offs examined. 4)
Participatory processes that go beyond a “whole-of-government” approach and
integrate relevant stakeholders from the “whole-of society” in a comprehensive
manner. This allows for the engagement and integration of the concerns expressed
by relevant stakeholders potentially affected or having an interest in energy
governance. 5)        Developing policy linkages to guarantee coherence and
assess policy affects and cross-sectoral linkages throughout the policy and
planning processes. This ensures that policies across sectors are pursued in a
balanced way that avoids competition or overlap between instruments,
institutions, and sectors. Mechanisms for assessing policy effects and cross-
sectoral linkages should allow to ensure that potential negative impacts are
prevented and mitigated, and potential positive synergies optimized, and thus
that policies in different sectors are coherent amongst themselves. Conversely,
without adequate collaboration, opportunities to harness positive cross-sectoral
linkages may be missed. Further, such mechanisms would ensure that cross-cutting
issues, such as gender or health, are mainstreamed into all sectoral policies.
6)       Alignment across government levels to ensure that policies, plans, and
programmes at all levels of government (national and sub-national) are aligned
and mutually supportive, and do not contradict or work against each other. 7)
Monitoring and reporting for policy coherence expressed through a requirement
that the effects of policies on the various dimensions of sustainable
development and cross-sectoral impacts are monitored and evaluated on a regular
basis using specific indicators and that the findings are used to inform
adaptive action to ensure that such action is coherent. 8) Financing for policy
coherence promotes the alignment of private and public finance to policy
coherence objectives while tracking related expenditures. This ensures that
funds from different sources are coherent with national policies and priorities.
Case Study 5: Policy Coherence in Energy Governance Institutional measures, such
as reducing government fragmentation, can increase policy coherence. But
policymakers also must look to the underlying political factors that are at the
root of policy incoherence, such as the values, norms and vested interests
unique to each country. Therefore, when assessing and developing measures for
policy coherence, decision-makers must acknowledge this process as subjective,
context-dependent, dynamic and cross-cutting. Therefore, one must consider the
underlying political, social and economic dynamics that shape how these
interactions manifest on the ground and across the levels of government, as well
as how they are perceived by various actors. Kenya: Policy Coherence for a Just
Energy Transition In Kenya, conflicts arise between the need to address climate
change and the country’s reliance on fossil fuels (namely coal) to drive its
economic growth and reduce poverty and inequality. The country does have a
strong policy framework in place to promote coherence, such as a long-term
development plan that aims to mainstream the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) across different levels of government. However, challenges to policy
coherence also arise due to not only poor institutional coordination but also a
lack of political will and a failure to implement existing laws and policies,
inhibiting efforts to reconcile such trade-offs. To assess and promote policy
coherence for a just energy transition in Kenya, the Stockholm Environmental
Institute promoted a workshop gathering government officials, researchers and
key stakeholders, comprising representatives from the private sector, civil
society, development partners and sectors involved with energy, climate, as well
as poverty and inequality reduction efforts. This workshop is an example of a
good practice in approaching and debating policy coherence for a just energy
transition. Most important, the workshop aimed at: --     Sensitizing
participants to the concept of policy coherence as applied to the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) and climate action; --       Share preliminary findings
on drivers and consequences of policy coherence and incoherence between energy,
climate and development goals; --    Identify and propose policy measures that
promote sensitive outcomes for development, equality and climate. Finally, the
workshop produced a Summary Report highlighting the key issues emerging and
recommendations for policy measures that can promote just energy transition in
Kenya by reinforcing positive outcomes for development, equality and climate
actions. Foresight Embracing foresight in energy transition policies can allow
policymakers to anticipate future challenges and opportunities. By considering
technological advancements, societal changes, and market trends, foresight
enables the design of adaptive and robust policies. It empowers decision-makers
to proactively address emerging trends, optimize resource allocation, and
prioritize investments for long-term effectiveness. Ultimately, foresight
ensures that energy transition policies remain relevant, resilient, and capable
of achieving sustainable outcomes. Box 10. What is foresight? In times of rapid
change and uncertainty, responsible policy must take multiple future
possibilities into account. Strategic foresight offers the means to do that.
Policies that assume a continuation of past trends and fail to account for
recent or emerging changes can prove ineffective, inadequate, or even
counterproductive. This is ever more relevant in the case of climate change and
the sustainability issues that arise from it, including those related to the
energy transition. Strategic foresight is a systematic approach to looking
beyond current expectations and considering a variety of plausible future
developments in order to identify implications for policies today. It does this
by revealing implicit assumptions, challenging dominant perspectives, and
engaging with surprising and significant disruptions that might otherwise be
dismissed or ignored. Foresight uses a range of methodologies, such as: --
Horizon scanning: seeking and researching signals of change in the present and
their potential future impacts. This component is the foundation of any
strategic foresight process. --  Megatrends analysis: exploring and reviewing of
large-scale changes building in the present at the intersection of multiple
policy domains, with complex and multidimensional impacts in the future. --
Scenario planning: developing multiple scenarios of how the future could look to
explore and learn from them in terms of policy implications for the present. --
Visioning and back-casting: developing an image of an ideal (or undesirable)
future state and working backwards to identify what steps to take (or avoid).
Strategic foresight informs measures of anticipatory governance, that is, the
systematic embedding and application of strategic foresight throughout the
entire governance process, including policy analysis, engagement, and decision-
making. Building a system of strategic foresight requires putting in place a set
of elements that enable a sustained and ongoing practice of strategic foresight
and anticipatory governance, in five broad areas: 1)        Demand: Sustained
demand for foresight from senior levels in government and public service, as
well as from relevant societal actors, can help to ensure that the necessary
institutional changes, resource allocations, and practices are put into place to
enable the quality and frequency of foresight required for sound policies.
Adequate demand, that strives for meeting concrete standards, ensures that
foresight is not carried out merely as an academic exercise, but rather informs
the key priorities of government and societies. 2)   Capacity: To meet the
demand for foresight efforts, institutions must be able to draw on the necessary
skills and capacity to implement strategic foresight thinking to policymaking.
This requires individuals trained in foresight thinking and methods, such as
horizon scanning and scenario planning. Effective foresight capacity also
requires some form of mainstreaming to ensure that even those who are not
directly involved in foresight understand its overall purpose and use – this can
be done through basic foresight and futures literacy training. 3)
Institutions: Effective mainstreaming and integration of foresight practices
across institutions and within decision-making processes often requires the
development of at least one central dedicated foresight unit to champion,
conduct and coordinate foresight work across government. Nevertheless, it is
essential to ensure the necessary space and autonomy for foresight units within
institutions so that these can deal with developments and implications which run
counter to established practices and orthodoxies. 4)   Embeddedness: Strategic
foresight should not be seen as an “extra” to conventional decision-making, but
as an integral part of it. Foresight can be used at any stage in the policy
cycle and is enhanced if all relevant players consider its relevance during the
decision-making process. Embeddedness is enhanced when outputs coincide with
moments of important decisions, leading to active discussions and engagement
with relevant future scenarios and their implications in policymaking. Finally,
embeddedness also applies to extending foresight to relevant stakeholders
outside of government, as engaging with societal stakeholders will increase the
quality and legitimacy of foresight. 5) Feedback: Building foresight systems
requires constant quality feedback and review to improve and respond to new
circumstances. While such evaluation is inherently difficult, as it involves
accessing the value of counter-factual outcomes within a complex decision-making
process, it allows for demonstrating the positive impacts of good foresight for
better policies. Foresight interventions can be broad or specific and conducted
rapidly and in depth. Broad foresight interventions typically focus on high
level government strategies or priorities, while narrower interventions often
focus on smaller emerging policy issues, involving a small group of institutions
or stakeholders. Regardless of its scale, foresight will enable policymakers to
provide more informed and relevant decisions in Energy Governance. Case Study 6:
Foresight in Energy Governance Example of existing attempts at foresight in
energy governance (case study on institution or country’s use of foresight,
highlighting the institutional setting, practices and outcomes) Adaptative
policies and regulations A clear theory of change and measurable indicators are
essential components to enhance the success of policies. Anticipating unintended
consequences during the policy design process helps mitigate risks and
uncertainties. Adaptive policies and regulations, with clear targets, roles, and
responsibilities, fostering new market frameworks, incentivizing investments,
and supporting research and development of new technologies, are crucial for
achieving a just energy transition within a limited timeframe. Box 11. How to
develop adaptative policies and regulations in the energy sector? The United
Nations Committee of Experts on Public Administration's Strategic Guidance Note
on Regulatory Impact Assessment offers valuable support for public policy design
and decision-making processes in the energy sector. Regulatory impact assessment
(RIA) is an evidence-based tool to support public decision-making. It is a
systemic appraisal of how a proposed policy is likely to affect certain
categories of stakeholders and a range of outcomes. This tool can be applied to
primary legislation of secondary (implementing) regulation, or both; and to
central government departments, as well as independent regulators, regional
governments, and local authorities, where RIA can be combined with community-
based and participatory forms of assessment. RIA is thus both a “whole-of-
government” and a “whole-of-society” approach, as includes different types of
policies, sectors, and institutions, as well as an essential component of
societal participation in the policy process. RIA can contribute to achieving
policy coherence and deliver effective governance for sustainable development.
With regard to policy coherence, RIA is a process of appraisal that involves
various stakeholders and diffuse interests while fostering transparency;
introducing formal procedures for those who are affected by proposed regulations
and contributing to public accountability and scrutiny of executive action.
While cross-national experience with RIA is still largely based on economic
assessments, in more integrated versions, the SDGs can be mainstreamed in RIA,
by analysing, when appropriate, the impact of social inclusion, health, gender,
energy, jobs, climate, biodiversity and consumption patterns in proposed
regulations. The UN CEPA Strategic Guidance Note anchors RIA in an overarching
strategy for “better regulation” under three building blocks: 1)
Proportionality: The methods and depth of analysis of RIA should be commensurate
with the importance of the proposal under discussion (i.e. light analyses are
sufficient for incremental policy changes), as RIA is dependent on scarce
resources like time and qualified personnel. At the same time, however, RIA can
serve to build the capacity in the public sector for data generation and
evidence-informed policymaking, as well as for the emergence of robust
consultation processes. 2)     Knowledge utilisation: RIA has a valuable impact
as practical knowledge that can be used by different actors in the policy
process to formulate the final policy choice, considering the breadth and depth
of delivered appraisals. Furthermore, the provision of a database and evidence
available to monitor laws and regulations after they enter into force makes RIA
a “living” planning document. 3)      Integration: RIA is more effective if
integrated with other policy instruments and institutional designs. Combination
with policy evaluation, risk management, freedom of information, general
principles of transparency and access to information and an overarching
framework of procedures for appraising policy options makes the difference in
creating better regulation. As for governance, RIA requires political
commitment, training, up-to-date guidance material and oversight mechanisms. In
essence, a Regulatory Impact Assessment is: --       A document that supports
decision-making with evidence on the advantages and disadvantages of alternative
options in terms of their likely impacts on stakeholders and outcomes; --     A
process to learn how to challenge prior beliefs, to learn about the likely
consequences of feasible current and future interventions and to build capacity
for appraisal; and --      A communication platform to engage stakeholders, to
facilitate legislative scrutiny of the executive, and to present evidence that
supports the choice of a particular rule. Case Study 7: Adaptative policies and
regulations in Energy Governance Example of Regulatory Impact Assessment
implementation in energy policy institutions. Some case studies could be: Peru:
<a href="https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/sites/b600b316-
en/index.html?itemId=/content/component/b600b316-en#section-d1e14096">6.
Peruvian case studies | Implementing Regulatory Impact Assessment at Peru’s
National Superintendence of Sanitation Services | OECD iLibrary (oecd-
ilibrary.org)</a> Antigua & Barbuda: <a href="https://www.sciencedirect.com/scie
nce/article/pii/S2211467X18300841">Regulatory impact assessment for implementing
energy efficient lighting standards in the small island developing state of
Antigua & Barbuda - ScienceDirect</a> De-risking renewable energy investments
Supporting policies to de-risk renewable energy investments is also crucial to
lower financial uncertainties and increase investor confidence in energy
transition. UNDP has developed a Framework for De-risking Renewable Energy
Investment (DREI) that provides an innovative, quantitative framework to assist
policymakers in developing countries to cost-effectively promote and scale-up
private sector investments in renewable energy. Box 12. How to support policies
to de-risk renewable energy investments? High up-front investment costs remain a
major impediment to the large-scale diffusion of renewable energy. The
availability and cost of commercial finance to meet these up-front investment
costs strongly depends on the risk environment for these investments. Project
developers in developing countries often struggle to access the large quantities
of financing they need. When available, the financing cost of this upfront
investment is substantially higher than in developed countries, translating into
higher power generation costs for renewable energy technologies. Rather than a
problem of capital generation, the key challenge of funding the transition
towards a low-carbon energy system is to address existing investor risks that
affect the financing costs and competitiveness of renewable energy in developing
countries. Public de-risking measures can broadly be divided into two groups: 1)
Policy de-risking instruments, which seek to remove the underlying barriers that
are the root causes of high-risk levels. This includes, for example,
institutional capacity building, grid connection and management and support for
more attractive renewable energy policy design. 2)        Financial de-risking
instruments, in parallel, seek to transfer the risk that investors face to
public actors, such as development banks. These instruments can be, for example,
loan guarantees, political risk insurance and public equity co-investments.
Recognising that not all risks can be eliminated through policy de-risking or
transferred through financial de-risking, efforts to reduce risks can be
supplemented by direct financial incentives (price premiums, tax breaks, carbon
offsets, etc.) to compensate for residual incremental costs and to thereby
increase returns. In this scenario, the UNDP DREI Framework is organised into
four stages, each of which is, in turn, divided into two steps to support
decision-making in de-risking of renewable energy investments: Stage 1: Risk
Environment In this stage, policymakers identify the set of investment barriers
and associated risks relevant to the renewable energy technology and analyse how
the existence of investment risks can increase financing costs. The first step
determines the set of barriers and risk categories relevant to the renewable
energy investment type. The second step quantifies the impact of these risks on
increasing the cost of equity or debt. Stage 2: Public Instruments In the second
stage, policymakers select a mix of public de-risking instruments to address the
investor risks and quantify how they in turn can reduce financing costs. The
first step selects public instruments that directly mitigate the identified
barriers and risk categories. The second step quantifies the impact of the
public instruments on each of cost of equity and debt. Stage 3: Levelised Cost
In this stage, policymakers determine the degree to which the reduced financing
costs impact the renewable energy’s life-cycle cost (LCOE). This is then
compared against the current baseline generation costs in the country. The first
step calculates the LCOE for the baseline energy mix. The second step calculates
the LCOE for the renewable energy investment, for both the pre- and post-de-
risking financing costs, and derives the incremental cost gap between the
renewable energy and baseline. Stage 4: Evaluation Finally, in the evaluation
stage, policymakers assess the selected public de-risking instrument mix using
four performance metrics, as well as through the use of sensitivity analyses.
The four metrics are: (i) investment leverage ratio, (ii) savings leverage
ratio; (iii) end-user affordability and (iv) carbon abatement. Case Study 8: De-
risking renewable energy investments We can show the different stages of DREI in
practice, using examples from the report <a
href="https://www.undp.org/publications/original-drei-
report">https://www.undp.org/publications/original-drei-report</a> Key actions
for a policy and regulatory framework In sum, when developing policies and
regulatory frameworks for effective energy governance, decisionmakers must
consider an overarching institutional and context analysis that accounts for the
complexities of the playing field. Prioritising the broader public interest and
integrating diverse stakeholders in decision-making processes allow for building
trust and confidence in proposed strategies. Furthermore, ensuring policy
coherence, foresight, and mixed approaches to de-risk investments in the energy
transition allow for prepared, adaptative and effective energy transition
strategies. Use political economy analysis and tools to understand factors that
affect the development of effective policy formulation and facilitate a timely
just energy transition. Provide a clear vision, leadership, and policies to
build trust and confidence with market players such as customers, businesses,
manufacturers, investors, and others. Formulate a legal and regulatory framework
that mitigates risks associated with renewable energy investments Ensure
effective and accountable implementation through co-creation approaches,
providing clear responsibilities and obligations of all stakeholders, effective
awareness and communication, and robust monitoring and reporting mechanisms.
Promote active coordination among different government institutions to ensure
policy coherence. Focus Area 3: Civic engagement and empowerment Meaningful
civic engagement with active support from all stakeholders is essential for a
just energy transition. However, participation in energy-related discussions is
currently inconsistent and constrained, which impedes the full realization of a
fair and just energy transition. Upholding three fundamental rights: access to
accurate, timely, and understandable information, active public participation,
and ensuring justice, as highlighted in Principle 10 of the Rio Declaration, is
critical to empower people, citizens, and communities to voice their preferences
and work together to achieve the public good. Access to quality, reliable and
understandable information Access to quality, reliable and easily understandable
information on energy-related matters is essential, especially in the context of
potential disinformation and information asymmetry. Achieving this requires the
implementation of appropriate transparency policies, safeguarding independent
media, and actively fighting disinformation. In this endeavour, the private
sector, leveraging its expertise in innovations and communications, can play a
pivotal role in promoting civic understanding and engagement across all segments
of society. Box 13. How to ensure access to accurate, timely, and understandable
information? UNDP views information pollution in all its forms as a hindrance to
information access and offers essential guidance to support countries and
governments in countering emerging information pollution. Information pollution
can significantly hamper the ability to respond to crises by perpetuating
dangerous rumours, undermining official crisis communication efforts, and
creating panic and confusion. To effectively reduce the impact of information
pollution, long-term, preventive responses are needed to encourage public trust
in and access to official information sources, support the media to effectively
tackle disinformation, build public resilience and ensure effective and rights-
based policy responses. The UNDP Framework for Strategic Guidance on Information
Integrity highlights four key outputs for a coherent approach to ensure access
to accurate, timely and understandable information on policymaking: 1)
Strengthened capacity of public institutions to promote access to reliable and
accurate information sources. This can be done through investment in public on-
line and off-line communication and engagement strategies with citizens, in
order to foster dialogues and partnerships to develop multi-sectorial strategies
to address and impede disinformation. 2)     Improved media capacity to
effectively manage information pollution, by building capacity of and equipping
journalists and other media professionals with the tools to address information
pollution, such as fact-checking platforms. This entails a need to an ensure
effective, rights-based, and collaborative regulation of online and traditional
media. 3)       Increased public resilience to information pollution through
media and internet literacy initiatives and campaigns, together with increased
community engagement and the development of initiatives to flag and fact-check
harmful content online and in news media. 4) Development of evidence-based,
proportionate, and rights-based information integrity policies to facilitate the
engagement of stakeholders across all levels in developing a common
understanding and shared solutions to information integrity challenges. Case
Study 9: Access to information in Energy Governance Example of best practices in
providing information access in energy governance Facilitating cooperation with
a heterogeneous Civil Society Effective dialogue with civil society actors has
become imperative amidst emerging complex challenges. These encompass job and
income loss from coal mine closures, potential for inadvertently sustaining or
widening gender gaps when accessing energy technologies and job opportunities in
the clean energy sector, energy projects negatively impacting indigenous
communities, displacement and land issues, and other human rights risks from
critical mineral development, including the harassment of environmental human
rights defenders. Facilitating cooperation between stakeholders can accelerate a
just energy transition, promote social cohesion, and support broader societal
development. Civil Society actors are diverse entities, and their heterogeneity
should be acknowledged. They ought to be perceived not merely as stakeholders
but as influential partners throughout the energy transition process. Engaging
them ensures that a broad spectrum of society—including women, youth, indigenous
peoples, and local communities—is represented at every stage: from problem
diagnosis to solution identification, implementation, and monitoring. Box 14.
How to engage with a diverse and heterogenous Civil Society? Empowering women
through increased sustainable energy access is a critical aspect of energy
governance. UNDP offers a toolkit and resource guide to help countries
incorporate gender and energy considerations into development programmes,
fostering gender-specific energy outcomes that cater to women's specific needs.
Women are disproportionally affected by energy poverty and often have specific
needs and issues related to energy access, as seen in the table below: >A table
of informational text Description automatically generated with medium
confidence< Accordingly, to create gender-sensitive energy policies, decision-
makers and key stakeholders can follow a set of principles: 1)    Build
awareness of different energy needs of men and women. Energy planning that is
implemented in a gender-neutral way misses important issues and inadvertently
discriminates, usually against women. For example, a policy to promote the use
of electricity by small enterprises may neglect the fact that many of women’s
income-generating activities use process heat (such as for food preparation and
processing, beer brewing, and pottery making), for which electricity may not be
the cheapest option. 2)  Promote a gender-mainstreaming approach. An engendered
energy policy would recognise that women and men have different energy needs due
to their differing household roles, responses to crises, and coping mechanisms
and would offer energy technologies and services that match those needs. 3)
Increase women’s participation in the energy sector. An engendered energy policy
involves more than the creation of a gender-sensitive set of energy-related
goals. The actual process of policy formulation and implementation needs to be
engendered. Increased participation of women in the energy sector and
improvement of their status relative to men can help to incorporate gender as an
integral part of energy policies and practices. 4)   Collect and use
disaggregated data. In each step of the policy process, policymakers should
specifically address how their decisions will differently impact various
population subgroups. This requires use of data sets disaggregated by sex and
other social and economic variables to determine who is using what forms of
energy to do what. 5)    Introduce gender budgeting. Public expenditures on
social services and infrastructures are often allocated on a gender-neutral
basis. However, budgetary allocations have the power to transform gender
inequalities. One approach to ensuring that the needs of women as well as men
are met is for government budgets to be gender disaggregated. Gender budgeting
is a tool that can be used to break down and identify the differentiated impacts
of public revenue allocations and expenditures as they affect men and women. 6)
Define the elements of gender-sensitive energy policies and advocate for gender-
sensitivity in the energy policy-making processes. Like any sectoral policy,
energy policy has a multidimensional character: it contains political, economic,
environmental, and social elements. Each of these elements has a gender
dimension. The four general aspects of energy policy listed above need to be
correlated with three issues that lie at the heart of women’s energy needs:
availability, affordability, and safety. There are a number of different,
sometimes overlapping, rationales for incorporating gender sensitivity into
energy policies, and different stakeholders may be more or less responsive to
different arguments and viewpoints. Similarly, youth engagement is vital for
influencing energy and climate policies and integrating them into various
sectoral policies. Furthermore, UNDP has developed a guide for meaningful youth
engagement, created with input from climate activists. This guide proposes a set
of overarching considerations for energy and climate governance: 1)  Meaningful
youth participation is about sharing power in youth-adult partnerships in
decision-making. 2)        Meaningful youth participation is enabled by systemic
empowerment, which involves addressing adult-centric structures, structural
inequality, and systemic discrimination. 3)   Meaningful youth participation is
about sharing power to influence institutional responses to climate change and
securing positive outcomes for youth development and climate ambition and
justice. 4)  Meaningful youth participation occurs when youth narratives are
radical in challenging the status quo that created and recreates the climate
crisis, and in proposing alternatives for a net-zero carbon and just society. 5)
Meaningful youth participation enlarges the space where young people can
participate, acknowledging that youth participation should be embedded in all
dimensions, all cycles, and all levels of governance, and in multi-stakeholder
settings. Inclusivity of indigenous communities in policy development is also
essential to address their specific needs, as seen in Latin America and
elsewhere, where they face energy poverty at disproportionate levels. Engaging
indigenous communities in energy governance ensures that decisions are open,
democratic and respect the human rights of all communities, while making good
use of indigenous knowledge and civic participation in the decision-making
process. Creating an enabling environment for the inclusion of indigenous
communities in energy policy must follow a set of principal actions: 1)
Policy advocacy to incorporate issues relevant to indigenous people in all
levels of policymaking, through building capacities and partnerships with
indigenous peoples and organisations. 2)   Transparent and participatory
processes in energy policymaking, aimed at inclusion and empowerment. 3)  Focus
on action-oriented research that involves the relevant constituencies, policy
reform, information, coordination and direct involvement of indigenous peoples,
through a valorisation and protection of indigenous knowledge. 4)   Capacity-
building of indigenous peoples and organisations to build their institutions at
the local level, and support and strengthen indigenous networks, at local,
national and international levels. Case Study 10: Diverse engagement in Energy
Governance Examples of youth, gender or indigenous community focused engagement
in energy policy-making Key actions for civic engagement and empowerment
Meaningful civic engagement and empowerment forms the basis for effective energy
governance, with long-lasting impacts that consider the needs of broader
society. Participation in energy governance can be enhanced by ensuring access
to quality, reliable and easily understandable information on energy-related
matters. Furthermore, acknowledging the heterogeneity of Civil Society allows
for facilitating cooperation between diverse stakeholders, bringing diverse
needs, inputs, and information to the governance process. Incorporate civic,
social, and media engagement in problem analysis, planning, and budgeting.
Recognize and support the vital role of the media in informing and fostering
public discourse to enhance transparency and accountability. Promote
understanding of substantive issues related to the governance of energy systems
as well as awareness of rights, roles, responsibilities and entitlements of
people and communities in the energy transition process. Build trust by
establishing conflict-sensitive mechanisms to understand and respond to needs,
priorities, and preferences of people and communities — especially the
disadvantaged and the vulnerable groups of our society. Create appropriate
platforms to enable meaningful public input into the definition and
implementation of energy policy, including mechanisms aimed at promoting
transparency and accountability among both public and private actors. Ensure the
adequate protection of civil society actors, particularly human rights
defenders, as well as journalists and other media personnel that are engaging in
energy policy, including those expressing positions of dissent. Focus Area 4:
Appropriate oversight The energy transition is a complex undertaking that
impacts individuals, households, communities, businesses, and countries. There
is limited time and resources to achieve the energy transition. To ensure that
all aspects are adequately covered and that the transition takes place in a just
and efficient manner, the energy transition must be adequately overseen by
relevant state and non-state actors, from parliamentary committees to consumer
commissions, human rights groups, and other such bodies. Effective oversight
Effective oversight and the role of relevant agencies are critical in the energy
transition process, as they review and monitor both existing and new
institutions. Human rights agencies play a vital role in ensuring that the
transition respects human rights, promotes widespread benefits, and addresses
adverse impacts on affected communities. Consumer commissions, on the other
hand, safeguard consumer rights and provide them with the freedom, reliable
information, and incentives to actively participate in the clean energy
transition. Box 15. What is effective oversight? External scrutiny and oversight
are essential parts of an integrity system. Beyond creating specific mechanisms
to establish and strengthen public accountability, oversight can foster learning
through evaluation and highlighting bad and good practices. Public
accountability helps to instil confidence that the public sector is being
managed appropriately. It is a relationship between an actor and a forum in
which the actor has an obligation to explain and to justify their conduct; the
forum can pose questions and pass judgement, and the actor may face
consequences. Thus, a comprehensive model of public accountability (i.e.
oversight) comprises two dimensions: 1)    Answerability: the obligation to
provide information, clarification, explanation, and justification. 2)
Enforcement: formal action against illegal, incorrect, inefficient, or
ineffective conduct of the accountable institution or public official Both
answerability and enforcement require an adequate institutional setup at two
levels: 1)       Internal mechanisms within the bureaucratic chain of command;
and 2)    External oversight and control mechanisms. The composition of an
effective oversight system can be seen in the scheme below: >Figure 12.1.
Architecture of oversight mechanisms ensuring public accountability< Case Study
11: Effective Foresight in Energy Governance Example of oversight structure in a
selected energy sector (showing the different institutions responsible for
different facets of oversight: regulatory institutions, consumer protection,
etc.) Agile oversight New institutions may need establishment, and existing ones
might require new responsibilities in response to the 21st-century energy
challenge. It is also imperative to consider the regular capacity development of
these institutions and allocate a dedicated oversight budget for energy
transition initiatives. An agile and robust oversight system is also necessary
to promote a whole-of-government approach to regulation and empowering
regulatory bodies to contribute to high-quality, forward-looking rulemaking and
enhancing systemic resilience. Box 16. How to ensure an agile regulatory
oversight in the energy sector? Robust and well-functioning regulatory oversight
systems are essential to ensure a whole-of government approach towards
regulation and foster regulatory quality through appropriate co-ordination
across the public administration and the appropriate scrutiny of the use of
regulatory management tools. Strengthening regulatory policy and governance to
ensure that innovation is sustainable, human-centred and respects fundamental
rights, democratic values and the rule of law will also require stepping up
efforts to align with international best practices. In the same vein, addressing
current challenges warrants adapting the design and application of existing
regulatory management tools to ensure their continued relevance. Innovation-
related challenges will often require more flexible and adaptive regulatory
frameworks. Ensuring broad-based and continuous stakeholder engagement as well
as close monitoring of outcomes (possibly in real time) and sufficient
investigative power for relevant bodies will be instrumental to do so. In this
light, the OECD has developed a set of recommendations to ensure an agile
regulatory oversight that supports sustainable innovation: 1)        Developing
more adaptive, iterative, and flexible assessment cycles, while capitalising on
technological solutions to improve the quality of evidence. The traditional
“regulate and forget” mindset must give way to “adapt-and-learn” approaches. The
capability to detect and understand innovations and their potential impact on
existing regulations, or, more important, the public values that are at stake,
is key. Addressing any “pacing problem” requires shortening timeframes
throughout the policymaking process and using regulatory management tools in a
more dynamic, adaptive, and iterative manner. 2)     Putting in place mechanisms
for public and stakeholder engagement, including citizens and small innovative
enterprises, from an early stage and throughout the policy cycle to enhance
transparency, build trust and capitalise on various sources of expertise. 3)
Considering the international innovation ecosystem to draw on the most relevant
evidence and regulatory approaches, as the most transformative innovations cut
across jurisdictional boundaries and, therefore, will inevitably face several
jurisdictions concurrently. 4)     Strengthening regulatory co-operation across
policy-making departments and regulatory agencies as well as between national
and sub-national levels of government, thus promoting a whole-of-government
approach. 5)     Stepping up bilateral, regional, and multilateral regulatory
co-operation to address the transboundary policy implications of innovation. 6)
Adapting governance frameworks and regulatory approaches so that they are
forward-looking. 7)   Developing more outcome-focused regulatory approaches to
enable innovation to thrive by harnessing the opportunities offered by digital
technologies and (big) data. 8) Harnessing the opportunities provided by non-
legally binding approaches either as an alternative or as a complement to other
regulatory instruments. Non-binding standards, by being easier to adopt and
offering more flexibility in implementation, can help address the regulatory
challenges raised by innovation. 9)       Enabling greater experimentation,
testing, and trialling to stimulate innovation under regulatory supervision.
Given the speed, breadth and uncertainty characterising innovation, creating
space for experimentation to support innovation while also fostering policy
learning and adaptation is essential. 10)       Adapting regulatory enforcement
strategies and activities to promote compliance, help innovators navigate the
regulatory environment and uphold public protection, including across
jurisdictions. Key actions for appropriate oversight There is no best oversight
model, but it is important to ensure that institutions are given independent
authority to engage and act in relation to their oversight functions for the
implementation of the just energy transition. Oversight agencies should perform
their duties without any limitation and to the greatest possible extent, which
will be achievable only with full cooperation of various policy actors, their
departments, and executives. Empower independent institutions with the mandate
to oversee and ensure strict compliance with laws and regulations. Their role is
pivotal in countering unfair treatment, illegality, corruption, and unethical
practices—both at individual and institutional levels—that might obstruct the
path to a fair, just, and inclusive energy transition. Moreover, these oversight
institutions should be integrated into existing national, regional, and
international reporting processes. Recognize the importance of multiple layers
of oversight and accountability, including parliament, civil society, and media,
as essential components in ensuring a comprehensive and robust system of checks
and balances within the energy transition process. Foster collaboration and
coordination among these various oversight entities to enhance accountability
and transparency. Support oversight agencies with accurate and useful
information, necessary training and capacity building, human capital, and
financial resources to take actions and fulfil their duties. Ensure consistent
and open communication between law enforcement and oversight stakeholders to
foster collaboration and support for their respective roles in enhancing
accountability. Module Wrap-Up Key messages In this module, you have learned
about the key dimensions of Energy Governance for a Just Energy Transition. We
have highlighted the main aspects that the UNDP promotes for energy governance,
from inclusive and effective institutions to appropriate oversight. We hope
that, through the content provided, via information boxes and case studies, you
are now able to critically assess: --    The importance of institutional and
context analyses, informed by political economy factors, in assessing and
developing energy governance policies and projects. --    The added-value of a
whole-of-society approach to energy governance that ensures that a diverse and
heterogeneous Civil Society is an active participant in decision-making. -- How
and why ensuring policy coherence across policy fields, from energy to gender
and health, is essential to develop effective energy transition policies. --
How policy oversight can help improve the quality of decision-making by helping
decision-makers to assess future scenarios and prepare accordingly. --  How to
develop adaptative policies and regulations, through Regulatory Impact
Assessment methods, to create more effective regulations. --      How to create
investment in the energy transition by de-risking investments in renewable
energy sources. --     How to develop appropriate and agile oversight mechanisms
that support the energy transition. What’s next? With the information provided
in this module, you are now able to assess the quality of energy governance
frameworks in four key points: (1) inclusive and effective institutions; (2)
policy and regulatory framework; (3) civic engagement and empowerment; and (4)
appropriate oversight. These points constitute the focus areas that enable a
just energy transition through effective, accountable, participative, and
transparent energy governance. We hope that, after this module, you can assess
and propose novel methods to: -- Develop an institutional and context analysis
informed by political economy factors; -- Improve public confidence and trust in
institutions through increased transparency and participation; --
Actively engage with relevant and diverse stakeholders in a whole-of-society
approach to energy governance; --  Ensure policy coherence between relevant
policy fields to support an overarching and just energy transition; -- Engage in
policy oversight to consider multiple future scenarios for energy governance
strategies; --   Develop adaptative policies and regulations through Regulatory
Impact Assessment; --    Support policies to de-risk renewable energy
investments and support the energy transition; --  Develop appropriate and agile
oversight mechanisms for the energy sector. References CEPA. 2021. CEPA Strategy
Guidance Note on Regulatory Impact Assessment. Accessible: <a href="https://publ
icadministration.desa.un.org/sites/default/files/cepa/Strategy%20note%20regulato
ry%20impact%20assessment%20Mar%202021.pdf">https://publicadministration.desa.un.
org/sites/default/files/cepa/Strategy%20note%20regulatory%20impact%20assessment%
20Mar%202021.pdf</a> Accessed: 09 December 2023 Kvam, Reidar. 2019. Meaningful
stakeholder engagement: a joint publication of the MFI working group on
environmental and social standards. Accessible: <a
href="https://publications.iadb.org/en/meaningful-stakeholder-engagement-joint-
publication-mfi-working-group-environmental-and-
social">https://publications.iadb.org/en/meaningful-stakeholder-engagement-
joint-publication-mfi-working-group-environmental-and-social</a> Accessed: 03
December 2023 OECD. 2021. 12th OECD Conference on Measuring Regulatory
Performance: Agile regulatory oversight for the 21st century.
GOV/RPC/MRP(2021)1. Accessible: <a href="https://web-
archive.oecd.org/2022-05-13/632073-Discussion-note-EN.pdf">https://web-
archive.oecd.org/2022-05-13/632073-Discussion-note-EN.pdf</a> Accessed: 21
December 2023 OECD. 2023. Driving Policy Coherence for Sustainable Development:
Accelerating Progress on the SDGs. OECD Publishing. Accessible: <a href="https:/
/doi.org/10.1787/a6cb4aa1-en">https://doi.org/10.1787/a6cb4aa1-en</a> Accessed:
03 December 2023 OECD. 2020. Oversight. In OECD Public Integrity Handbook.
Accessible: <a href="https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/sites/7715f0e0-
en/index.html?itemId=/content/component/7715f0e0-en">https://www.oecd-ilibrary.o
rg/sites/7715f0e0-en/index.html?itemId=/content/component/7715f0e0-en</a>
Accessed: 20 December 2023 OECD. 2021. Recommendation of the Council for Agile
Regulatory Governance to Harness Innovation, OECD/LEGAL/0464. Accessible: <a hre
f="https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/public/doc/669/9110a3d9-3bab-48ca-9f1f-
4ab6f2201ad9.pdf">https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/public/doc/669/9110a3d9-
3bab-48ca-9f1f-4ab6f2201ad9.pdf</a> Accessed: 22 December 2023 OECD. 2019.
Strategic Foresight for Better Policies: Building Effective Governance in the
Face of Uncertain Futures. Accessible: <a href="https://www.oecd.org/strategic-f
oresight/ourwork/Strategic%20Foresight%20for%20Better%20Policies.pdf">https://ww
w.oecd.org/strategic-
foresight/ourwork/Strategic%20Foresight%20for%20Better%20Policies.pdf</a>
Accessed: 09 December 2023 Shawoo, Zoha. n.d. Addressing Climate Change Equality
Requires a Better Understanding of Policy Coherence: Experiences from Kenya,
Colombia and Australia show why. UNDP SDG Integration. Accessible:<a
href="https://sdgintegration.undp.org/addressing-climate-change-equitably-
requires-better-understanding-policy-coherence">
https://sdgintegration.undp.org/addressing-climate-change-equitably-requires-
better-understanding-policy-coherence</a> Accessed: 19 January 2024 Shawoo et
al. 2020. Increasing policy coherence between NDCs and SDGs: a national
perspective. Stockholm Environment Institute. Accessible:<a
href="https://www.sei.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/increasing-policy-
coherence-between-ndcs-and-sdgs-a-national-perspective.pdf">
https://www.sei.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/increasing-policy-coherence-
between-ndcs-and-sdgs-a-national-perspective.pdf</a> Accessed: 19 January 2024
Stockholm Environmental Institute. 2023. Assessing policy coherence for just
energy transition in Kenya. Accessible:<a
href="https://www.sei.org/events/assessing-policy-coherence-for-just-energy-
transition-in-kenya/"> https://www.sei.org/events/assessing-policy-coherence-
for-just-energy-transition-in-kenya/</a> Accessed: 19 January 2024 Stockholm
Environment Institute. 2012. Energy for a Shared Development Agenda: Global
Scenarios and Governance Implications. Accessible: <a href="https://pure.iiasa.a
c.at/id/eprint/10168/1/XO-12-
006.pdf">https://pure.iiasa.ac.at/id/eprint/10168/1/XO-12-006.pdf</a> Accessed:
26 November 2023 UN. 1992. United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 3-14 June 1992. Accessible: <a href="https:
//www.un.org/en/conferences/environment/rio1992">https://www.un.org/en/conferenc
es/environment/rio1992</a> Accessed: 28 December 2023 UN DESA and UNDP. 2021.
“What is a Good Practice?” – A framework to analyze the quality of stakeholder
engagement inimplementation and follow-up of the 2030 agenda Accessible: <a
href="https://www.undp.org/policy-centre/oslo/publications/what-good-
practice">https://www.undp.org/policy-centre/oslo/publications/what-good-
practice</a> Accessed: 03 December 2023 UNDP. 2022. Aiming higher: Elevating
meaningful youth engagement for climate action. Accessible: <a
href="https://www.undp.org/publications/aiming-higher-elevating-meaningful-
youth-engagement-climate-action">https://www.undp.org/publications/aiming-
higher-elevating-meaningful-youth-engagement-climate-action</a> Accessed: 23
December 2023 UNDP. 2022. Checklist for Gender Responsive, Socially Inclusive
Stakeholder Consultations. Accessible: <a href="https://www.sparkblue.org/system
/files/2022-
12/20221216%20National%20Consultation%20Gender%20Social%20Inclusion%20Checklist%
203%20action%5B17519%5D.pdf">https://www.sparkblue.org/system/files/2022-
12/20221216%20National%20Consultation%20Gender%20Social%20Inclusion%20Checklist%
203%20action%5B17519%5D.pdf</a> Accessed: 03 December 2023 UNDP. 2013. Derisking
Renewable Energy Investment: A framework to support policymakers in selecting
policy instruments to promote renewable energy investment in developing
countries. UNDP. Accessible: <a
href="https://www.undp.org/publications/original-drei-
report">https://www.undp.org/publications/original-drei-report</a> Accessed: 17
December 2023 UNDP. 2015. ENERGYPLUS Guidelines. Accessible: <a
href="https://www.undp.org/eurasia/publications/energyplus-
guidelines">https://www.undp.org/eurasia/publications/energyplus-guidelines</a>
Accessed: 26 November 2023 UNDP. 2015. Gender and Energy for Sustainable
Development: A toolkit and resource guide. Page 19. Accessible: <a
href="https://www.undp.org/publications/energy-and-gender-sustainable-
development-toolkit-and-resource-
guide">https://www.undp.org/publications/energy-and-gender-sustainable-
development-toolkit-and-resource-guide</a> Accessed: 23 December 2023 UNDP.
2023. Governance and Peacebuilding: Responsible and Accountable Institutions.
Accessible: <a href="https://www.undp.org/eurasia/our-focus/governance-and-
peacebuilding/responsible-and-accountable-
institutions">https://www.undp.org/eurasia/our-focus/governance-and-
peacebuilding/responsible-and-accountable-institutions</a> Accessed: 26 November
2023 UNDP. 2018. Institutional and Context Analysis for the Sustainable
Development Goals. Accessible: <a
href="https://www.undp.org/publications/institutional-and-context-analysis-
sustainable-development-goals">https://www.undp.org/publications/institutional-
and-context-analysis-sustainable-development-goals</a> Accessed: 17 January 2024
UNDP. 2012. Institutional and Context Analysis – Guidance Note. Accessible: <a
href="https://www.undp.org/publications/institutional-and-context-analysis-
guidance-note">https://www.undp.org/publications/institutional-and-context-
analysis-guidance-note</a> Accessed: 27 December 2023 UNDP. 2023. Just Energy
Transition: Governance needs and Implications. Testing the application of a
conceptual framework. Discussion Paper for COP28. Accessible: <a href="https://w
ww.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2023-12/discussion_paper_-
_just_energy_transition_-_governance_needs_and_implications_-_final_0.pdf">https
://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2023-12/discussion_paper_-
_just_energy_transition_-_governance_needs_and_implications_-_final_0.pdf</a>
Accessed: 28 December 2023 UNDP. 2015. Staying on track: Tackling corruption
risks in Climate Change. Accessible: <a
href="https://www.undp.org/publications/staying-track-tackling-corruption-risks-
climate-change">https://www.undp.org/publications/staying-track-tackling-
corruption-risks-climate-change</a> Accessed: 27 December 2023 UNDP. 2022.
Strategic Guidance: Information Integrity: Forging a pathway to Truth,
Resilience and Trust. Accessible: <a href="https://www.undp.org/policy-
centre/oslo/publications/strategic-guidance-information-integrity-forging-
pathway-truth-resilience-and-trust">https://www.undp.org/policy-
centre/oslo/publications/strategic-guidance-information-integrity-forging-
pathway-truth-resilience-and-trust</a> Accessed: 20 December 2023 UNDP. 2023.
Strengthening Energy Governance Systems: An Energy Governance Framework for a
Just Energy Transition. Accessible: <a
href="https://www.undp.org/publications/strengthening-energy-governance-systems-
energy-governance-framework-just-energy-
transition">https://www.undp.org/publications/strengthening-energy-governance-
systems-energy-governance-framework-just-energy-transition</a> Accessed: 26
November 2023 UNDP. 2022. Terminal Evaluation of UNDP/GEF Project: Building
institutional and technical capacities to enhance transparency. Accessible: <a h
ref="https://erc.undp.org/evaluation/documents/download/20282">https://erc.undp.
org/evaluation/documents/download/20282</a> Accessed: 17 December 2023 UNDP.
2015. UNDP and Indigenous Peoples: A policy of engagement. Accessible: <a
href="https://www.undp.org/publications/undp-and-indigenous-peoples-policy-
engagement">https://www.undp.org/publications/undp-and-indigenous-peoples-
policy-engagement</a> Accessed: 23 December 2023 UNDP. 2008. UNDP Practice Note:
Mainstreaming Anti-Corruption in Development. Accessible: <a href="https://www.u
ndp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/publications/Mainstreaming_Anti-Corruption
_in_Development.pdf">https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/publicat
ions/Mainstreaming_Anti-Corruption_in_Development.pdf</a> Accessed: 27 December
2023 UN Environment Programme. 2022. Methodology for SDG-indicator 17.14.1:
Mechanisms in place to enhance policy coherence for sustainable development.
Accessible: <a href="https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/38262
/SDG17.14.1_methodology.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y">https://wedocs.unep.org/bits
tream/handle/20.500.11822/38262/SDG17.14.1_methodology.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=
y</a> Accessed: 03 December 2023 UNESCOSOC. 2018. Principles of Effective
Governance for Sustainable Development. Accessible: <a href="https://publicadmin
istration.un.org/Portals/1/Images/CEPA/Principles_of_effective_governance_englis
h.pdf">https://publicadministration.un.org/Portals/1/Images/CEPA/Principles_of_e
ffective_governance_english.pdf</a> Accessed: 26 November 2023 footnote1) UNDP.
2015. ENERGYPLUS Guidelines. Accessible: <a
href="https://www.undp.org/eurasia/publications/energyplus-
guidelines">https://www.undp.org/eurasia/publications/energyplus-guidelines</a>
Accessed: 26 November 2023 footnote2) UNDP. 2023. Governance and Peacebuilding:
Responsible and Accountable Institutions. Accessible: <a
href="https://www.undp.org/eurasia/our-focus/governance-and-
peacebuilding/responsible-and-accountable-
institutions">https://www.undp.org/eurasia/our-focus/governance-and-
peacebuilding/responsible-and-accountable-institutions</a> Accessed: 26 November
2023 footnote3) UNDP. 2023. Strengthening Energy Governance Systems: An Energy
Governance Framework for a Just Energy Transition. Accessible: <a
href="https://www.undp.org/publications/strengthening-energy-governance-systems-
energy-governance-framework-just-energy-
transition">https://www.undp.org/publications/strengthening-energy-governance-
systems-energy-governance-framework-just-energy-transition</a> Accessed: 26
November 2023 footnote4) UNDP. 2023. Strengthening Energy Governance Systems: An
Energy Governance Framework for a Just Energy Transition. Accessible: <a
href="https://www.undp.org/publications/strengthening-energy-governance-systems-
energy-governance-framework-just-energy-
transition">https://www.undp.org/publications/strengthening-energy-governance-
systems-energy-governance-framework-just-energy-transition</a> Accessed: 26
November 2023 footnote5) UNESCOSOC. 2018. Principles of Effective Governance for
Sustainable Development. Accessible: <a href="https://publicadministration.un.or
g/Portals/1/Images/CEPA/Principles_of_effective_governance_english.pdf">https://
publicadministration.un.org/Portals/1/Images/CEPA/Principles_of_effective_govern
ance_english.pdf</a> Accessed: 26 November 2023 footnote6) UNDP. 2023.
Strengthening Energy Governance Systems: An Energy Governance Framework for a
Just Energy Transition. Accessible: <a
href="https://www.undp.org/publications/strengthening-energy-governance-systems-
energy-governance-framework-just-energy-
transition">https://www.undp.org/publications/strengthening-energy-governance-
systems-energy-governance-framework-just-energy-transition</a> Accessed: 26
November 2023 footnote7) UNDP. 2023. Just Energy Transition: Governance needs
and Implications. Testing the application of a conceptual framework. Discussion
Paper for COP28. Accessible: <a href="https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke3
26/files/2023-12/discussion_paper_-_just_energy_transition_-
_governance_needs_and_implications_-_final_0.pdf">https://www.undp.org/sites/g/f
iles/zskgke326/files/2023-12/discussion_paper_-_just_energy_transition_-
_governance_needs_and_implications_-_final_0.pdf</a> Accessed: 28 December 2023
footnote8) Stockholm Environment Institute. 2012. Energy for a Shared
Development Agenda: Global Scenarios and Governance Implications. Accessible: <a
href="https://pure.iiasa.ac.at/id/eprint/10168/1/XO-12-
006.pdf">https://pure.iiasa.ac.at/id/eprint/10168/1/XO-12-006.pdf</a> Accessed:
26 November 2023 footnote9) UNDP. 2008. UNDP Practice Note: Mainstreaming Anti-
Corruption in Development. Accessible: <a href="https://www.undp.org/sites/g/fil
es/zskgke326/files/publications/Mainstreaming_Anti-Corruption_in_Development.pdf
">https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/publications/Mainstreaming_
Anti-Corruption_in_Development.pdf</a> Accessed: 27 December 2023 footnote10) <a
href="https://anti-corruption.org/">https://anti-corruption.org/</a> footnote11)
UNDP. 2015. Staying on track: Tackling corruption risks in Climate Change.
Accessible: <a href="https://www.undp.org/publications/staying-track-tackling-
corruption-risks-climate-change">https://www.undp.org/publications/staying-
track-tackling-corruption-risks-climate-change</a> Accessed: 27 December 2023
footnote12) Ibid. footnote13) Ibid. footnote14) UNDP. 2023. Enhancing Climate
Change Transparency: How Developing Countries are Taking Action. Accessible: <a
href="https://www.undp.org/publications/enhancing-climate-change-transparency-
how-developing-countries-are-taking-
action">https://www.undp.org/publications/enhancing-climate-change-transparency-
how-developing-countries-are-taking-action</a> Accessed: 17 January 2024
footnote15) UNDP. 2022. Terminal Evaluation of UNDP/GEF Project: Building
institutional and technical capacities to enhance transparency. Accessible: <a h
ref="https://erc.undp.org/evaluation/documents/download/20282">https://erc.undp.
org/evaluation/documents/download/20282</a> Accessed: 17 December 2023
footnote16) Accessible here: <a href="https://visualizador.gobiernoabierto.gub.u
y/visualizador/api/repos/%3Apublic%3Aorganismos%3Aambiente%3Avisualizador_cdn.wc
df/generatedContent">https://visualizador.gobiernoabierto.gub.uy/visualizador/ap
i/repos/%3Apublic%3Aorganismos%3Aambiente%3Avisualizador_cdn.wcdf/generatedConte
nt</a> footnote17) UNDP. 2012. Institutional and Context Analysis – Guidance
Note. Accessible: <a href="https://www.undp.org/publications/institutional-and-
context-analysis-guidance-note">https://www.undp.org/publications/institutional-
and-context-analysis-guidance-note</a> Accessed: 27 December 2023 footnote18)
Ibid. footnote19) Ibid. footnote20) UNDP. 2018. Institutional and Context
Analysis for the Sustainable Development Goals. Accessible: <a
href="https://www.undp.org/publications/institutional-and-context-analysis-
sustainable-development-goals">https://www.undp.org/publications/institutional-
and-context-analysis-sustainable-development-goals</a> Accessed: 17 January 2024
footnote21) Ibid. footnote22) Ibid. footnote23) UNDP. 2022. Checklist for Gender
Responsive, Socially Inclusive Stakeholder Consultations. Accessible: <a href="h
ttps://www.sparkblue.org/system/files/2022-
12/20221216%20National%20Consultation%20Gender%20Social%20Inclusion%20Checklist%
203%20action%5B17519%5D.pdf">https://www.sparkblue.org/system/files/2022-
12/20221216%20National%20Consultation%20Gender%20Social%20Inclusion%20Checklist%
203%20action%5B17519%5D.pdf</a> Accessed: 03 December 2023 footnote24) UN DESA
and UNDP. 2021. “What is a Good Practice?” – A framework to analyze the quality
of stakeholder engagement inimplementation and follow-up of the 2030 agenda
Accessible: <a href="https://www.undp.org/policy-centre/oslo/publications/what-
good-practice">https://www.undp.org/policy-centre/oslo/publications/what-good-
practice</a> Accessed: 03 December 2023 footnote25) Kvam, Reidar. 2019.
Meaningful stakeholder engagement: a joint publication of the MFI working group
on environmental and social standards. Accessible: <a
href="https://publications.iadb.org/en/meaningful-stakeholder-engagement-joint-
publication-mfi-working-group-environmental-and-
social">https://publications.iadb.org/en/meaningful-stakeholder-engagement-
joint-publication-mfi-working-group-environmental-and-social</a> Accessed: 03
December 2023 footnote26) Ibid. footnote27) OECD. 2023. Driving Policy Coherence
for Sustainable Development: Accelerating Progress on the SDGs. OECD Publishing.
Accessible: <a href="https://doi.org/10.1787/a6cb4aa1-
en">https://doi.org/10.1787/a6cb4aa1-en</a> Accessed: 03 December 2023
footnote28) UN Environment Programme. 2022. Methodology for SDG-indicator
17.14.1: Mechanisms in place to enhance policy coherence for sustainable
development. Accessible: <a href="https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.50
0.11822/38262/SDG17.14.1_methodology.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y">https://wedocs.
unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/38262/SDG17.14.1_methodology.pdf?sequence
=1&isAllowed=y</a> Accessed: 03 December 2023 footnote29) Shawoo et al. 2020.
Increasing policy coherence between NDCs and SDGs: a national perspective.
Stockholm Environment Institute. Accessible: <a href="https://www.sei.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/03/increasing-policy-coherence-between-ndcs-and-sdgs-a-
national-perspective.pdf">https://www.sei.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/03/increasing-policy-coherence-between-ndcs-and-sdgs-a-
national-perspective.pdf</a> Accessed: 19 January 2024 footnote30) Ibid.
footnote31) Shawoo, Zoha. n.d. Addressing Climate Change Equality Requires a
Better Understanding of Policy Coherence: Experiences from Kenya, Colombia and
Australia show why. UNDP SDG Integration. Accessible: <a
href="https://sdgintegration.undp.org/addressing-climate-change-equitably-
requires-better-understanding-policy-
coherence">https://sdgintegration.undp.org/addressing-climate-change-equitably-
requires-better-understanding-policy-coherence</a> Accessed: 19 January 2024
footnote32) Stockholm Environmental Institute. 2023. Assessing policy coherence
for just energy transition in Kenya. Accessible: <a
href="https://www.sei.org/events/assessing-policy-coherence-for-just-energy-
transition-in-kenya/">https://www.sei.org/events/assessing-policy-coherence-for-
just-energy-transition-in-kenya/</a> Accessed: 19 January 2024 footnote33) OECD.
2019. Strategic Foresight for Better Policies: Building Effective Governance in
the Face of Uncertain Futures. Accessible: <a
href="https://www.oecd.org/strategic-foresight/ourwork/Strategic%20Foresight%20f
or%20Better%20Policies.pdf">https://www.oecd.org/strategic-
foresight/ourwork/Strategic%20Foresight%20for%20Better%20Policies.pdf</a>
Accessed: 09 December 2023 footnote34) Ibid. footnote35) Ibid. footnote36) CEPA.
2021. CEPA Strategy Guidance Note on Regulatory Impact Assessment. Accessible:
<a href="https://publicadministration.desa.un.org/sites/default/files/cepa/Strat
egy%20note%20regulatory%20impact%20assessment%20Mar%202021.pdf">https://publicad
ministration.desa.un.org/sites/default/files/cepa/Strategy%20note%20regulatory%2
0impact%20assessment%20Mar%202021.pdf</a> Accessed: 09 December 2023 footnote37)
Ibid. footnote38) Ibid. footnote39) Ibid. footnote40) More information on this
can be found in the section on oversight. footnote41) Ibid. footnote42) UNDP.
2013. Derisking Renewable Energy Investment: A framework to support policymakers
in selecting policy instruments to promote renewable energy investment in
developing countries. UNDP. Accessible: <a
href="https://www.undp.org/publications/original-drei-
report">https://www.undp.org/publications/original-drei-report</a> Accessed: 17
December 2023 footnote43) Ibid. footnote44) Ibid. footnote45) UN. 1992. United
Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 3-14
June 1992. Accessible: <a href="https://www.un.org/en/conferences/environment/ri
o1992">https://www.un.org/en/conferences/environment/rio1992</a> Accessed: 28
December 2023 footnote46) UNDP. 2022. Strategic Guidance: Information Integrity:
Forging a pathway to Truth, Resilience and Trust. Accessible: <a
href="https://www.undp.org/policy-centre/oslo/publications/strategic-guidance-
information-integrity-forging-pathway-truth-resilience-and-
trust">https://www.undp.org/policy-centre/oslo/publications/strategic-guidance-
information-integrity-forging-pathway-truth-resilience-and-trust</a> Accessed:
20 December 2023 footnote47) UNDP. 2015. Gender and Energy for Sustainable
Development: A toolkit and resource guide. Page 19. Accessible: <a
href="https://www.undp.org/publications/energy-and-gender-sustainable-
development-toolkit-and-resource-
guide">https://www.undp.org/publications/energy-and-gender-sustainable-
development-toolkit-and-resource-guide</a> Accessed: 23 December 2023
footnote48) Ibid. footnote49) UNDP. 2022. Aiming higher: Elevating meaningful
youth engagement for climate action. Accessible: <a
href="https://www.undp.org/publications/aiming-higher-elevating-meaningful-
youth-engagement-climate-action">https://www.undp.org/publications/aiming-
higher-elevating-meaningful-youth-engagement-climate-action</a> Accessed: 23
December 2023 footnote50) UNDP. 2015. UNDP and Indigenous Peoples: A policy of
engagement. Accessible: <a href="https://www.undp.org/publications/undp-and-
indigenous-peoples-policy-engagement">https://www.undp.org/publications/undp-
and-indigenous-peoples-policy-engagement</a> Accessed: 23 December 2023
footnote51) OECD. 2020. Oversight. In OECD Public Integrity Handbook.
Accessible: <a href="https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/sites/7715f0e0-
en/index.html?itemId=/content/component/7715f0e0-en">https://www.oecd-ilibrary.o
rg/sites/7715f0e0-en/index.html?itemId=/content/component/7715f0e0-en</a>
Accessed: 20 December 2023 footnote52) OECD. 2021. 12th OECD Conference on
Measuring Regulatory Performance: Agile regulatory oversight for the 21st
century. GOV/RPC/MRP(2021)1. Accessible: <a href="https://web-
archive.oecd.org/2022-05-13/632073-Discussion-note-EN.pdf">https://web-
archive.oecd.org/2022-05-13/632073-Discussion-note-EN.pdf</a> Accessed: 21
December 2023 footnote53) OECD. 2021. Recommendation of the Council for Agile
Regulatory Governance to Harness Innovation, OECD/LEGAL/0464. Accessible: <a hre
f="https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/public/doc/669/9110a3d9-3bab-48ca-9f1f-
4ab6f2201ad9.pdf">https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/public/doc/669/9110a3d9-
3bab-48ca-9f1f-4ab6f2201ad9.pdf</a> Accessed: 22 December 2023