Module 8: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation in the Energy Sector Module
Overview This module explores the intricate links between energy systems and
climate change, emphasizing the urgent shift to sustainable energy. It delves
into the energy sector's substantial greenhouse gas emissions and the global
carbon footprint of energy production and consumption. The module highlights the
pressing need for transitioning to low-carbon and renewable sources, presenting
evidence of climate change impacts and advocating for swift action. The module
addresses the vulnerability of energy infrastructure to climate-related risks
and advocates for adaptation measures, including resilient grid systems and
distributed energy resources. Lastly, it emphasizes the crucial role of
renewable energy in enhancing resilience, showcasing successful integration into
disaster preparedness. Learning Objectives 1) Recognize the substantial
contribution of energy systems to global greenhouse gas emissions and the
importance of transforming energy production and consumption to achieve net-zero
emissions by mid-century. 2)       Understand the vulnerabilities of energy
infrastructure to climate-related risks. 3)    Identify and evaluate sustainable
energy solutions including renewable sources and their role in decarbonizing the
energy sector. 4)    Evaluating strategies for enhancing the resilience of
energy systems against climate shocks, including infrastructure upgrades and
integrating renewable energy sources 5)      Understand the role of sustainable
energy solution as a climate adaptation strategy. Introduction The current
energy system is a major driver of global warming, accounting for more than 73%
of total greenhouse gas emissions. This means transforming how we produce and
consume energy is essential, with the world’s ability to meet its climate goals
hinging on the energy sector’s ability to reach net zero emissions by mid-
century. As temperatures break records year after year, the case for action has
never been stronger. The rapid growth of some clean energy technologies –
including electric cars, solar PV, batteries and heat pumps – has kept the door
open to limiting the rise in the global average temperature to 1.5 °C above pre-
industrial levels, the target set by the Paris Agreement to avoid the worst
impacts of climate change. Yet to meet this goal, much faster progress is needed
on a much larger scale, according to International Energy Agency (IEA)analysis.
This will require even greater international co-operation and ambition from
policy makers. The pressing challenge of climate change necessitates urgent and
strategic interventions across various sectors, particularly in the realm of
sustainable energy. The imperative for such interventions is underpinned by
robust scientific consensus indicating that the current trajectory of carbon
emissions and environmental degradation poses severe risks to global ecosystems,
human health, and economic stability. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) highlights that to limit global warming to 1.5°C above pre-
industrial levels, a substantial reduction in carbon emissions is essential by
2030, entailing a 45% reduction from 2010 levels and reaching net zero by 2050.
Sustainable energy, primarily characterized by renewable sources such as solar,
wind, hydro, and geothermal, offers a viable pathway to decarbonize the energy
sector. According to the IEA renewables accounted for almost 30% of total global
electricity production in 2020, a figure projected to rise as technology
improves and costs decline. Furthermore, the adaptation strategies integrated
within the energy sector—such as enhancing infrastructure resilience and
adopting smart-grid technologies—demonstrate a proactive approach to climate
change. These strategies not only safeguard energy systems from climatic
disruptions but also ensure that these systems can support broader societal
adaptation measures. Moreover, the transition to sustainable energy systems is
not merely a technical challenge but also an opportunity for socio-economic
transformation. This transition has the potential to stimulate job creation,
enhance energy security, and foster technological innovation. A 2021 report by
the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) suggests that accelerating the
deployment of renewable energy and energy efficiency measures could generate
nearly 30 million jobs by 2030. Key Terms Climate Change: According to the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), climate change refers to a
change in the state of the climate that can be identified by changes in the mean
and/or the variability of its properties, and that persists for an extended
period, typically decades or longer. Climate change may be due to natural
internal processes or external forcings, or to persistent anthropogenic changes
in the composition of the atmosphere or in land use. Sustainable Energy: IEA
defines sustainable energy as energy that meets the needs of the present without
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. It
primarily involves renewable energy sources such as solar, wind, hydro, and
bioenergy, which produce little or no greenhouse gases and therefore have a
minimal environmental footprint. Climate Mitigation: The United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) defines mitigation as an
anthropogenic intervention to reduce the sources or enhance the sinks of
greenhouse gases. This includes efforts to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases
through energy efficiency and increased use of low-carbon or carbon-neutral
energy sources. Climate Adaptation: Adaptation refers to the process of
adjustment to actual or expected climate and its effects, in order to moderate
harm or exploit beneficial opportunities, as described by the IPCC. In human
systems, adaptation seeks to alleviate the impacts of climate change, while in
natural systems, it might involve managing or conserving habitats to protect
biodiversity. Renewable Energy: Renewable energy is defined by the Renewable
Energy Policy Network for the 21st Century (REN21) as energy that is collected
from renewable resources, which are naturally replenished on a human timescale,
such as sunlight, wind, rain, tides, waves, and geothermal heat. Carbon
Neutrality: Carbon neutrality, as defined by the United Nations, refers to
achieving a net-zero carbon footprint by balancing a measured amount of carbon
released with an equivalent amount sequestered or offset, or buying enough
carbon credits to make up the difference. It is a strong commitment to achieving
zero carbon emissions, which is crucial for slowing climate change. CHAPTER ONE:
LINKAGES BETWEEN ENERGY SYSTEMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE How Energy Systems Contribute
to Climate Change? The concept of a global carbon footprint is crucial in
climate change studies, as it provides a quantitative evaluation of the various
ways in which human activities contribute to global warming. This phrase refers
to the total emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) and other carbon-based gases
released into the atmosphere due to using fossil fuels in various human
activities, either individually or collectively on a global scale. The
researchers estimate that the world's emissions of carbon dioxide will exceed 40
billion tons in 2023, including nearly 37 billion tons from fossil fuels.
Overall emissions are up 1.1% compared to 2022 levels and 1.5% compared to pre-
pandemic levels, continuing a 10-year plateau. The top five emitters of carbon
dioxide in 2023 are the same as in 2022: China, the United States, India,
Russia, and Brazil. Together, these five countries account for more than half of
global carbon emissions. China is the world’s largest emitter of carbon dioxide,
accounting for 32% of global emissions in 2023. The United States is the second-
largest emitter, accounting for 14% of global emissions. India is the third-
largest emitter, accounting for 9% of global emissions. >Global Carbon Emissions
for 2023< CO2 emissions grew in North America and Asia (excluding China)
outweighing reductions from Europe and China. At a global level, CO2 emissions
from power and transport (including international bunkers) grew by 261 Mt and
254 Mt, respectively, more than offsetting reductions from industry and
buildings. >A graph of a graph showing the global warming Description
automatically generated with medium confidence< Moreover, many advanced
economies have seen declines in CO2 emissions, reaching levels not seen in fifty
years. This reduction is largely due to advancements in renewable energy,
increased energy efficiency, and stronger climate policies​. In contrast,
emerging markets like China and India have experienced rises in CO2 emissions,
driven largely by economic growth and increased energy demand. These countries
face the dual challenge of sustaining economic growth while transitioning to
cleaner energy sources​. It is estimated that energy accounts for more than
three-quarters of total gas (GHG) emissions globally constituting approximately
73.2% of these emissions. Emissions from energy combustion increased by 423 Mt,
while emissions from industrial processes decreased by 102 Mt. Total energy-
related greenhouse gas emissions increased by 1.0% to an all-time high of 41.3
Gt CO2-eq. CO2 emissions from energy combustion and industrial process accounted
for 89% of energy-related greenhouse gas emissions in 2022. Methane from energy
combustion, leaks and venting represented another 10%, mostly coming from
onshore oil and gas operations as well as steam coal production. Methane
emissions rose to nearly 135 Mt CH4 or around 4 Gt CO2-eq in 2022, despite high
natural gas prices that increased the cost effectiveness of methane abatement
technologies. This increase was influenced by factors such as economic recovery
activities post-COVID-19, which led to an uptick in energy demand​. >legacy-
wordpress-upload<(See the Box XX for more information regarding the emissions
breakdown in energy sector) Box XX: Emissions Breakdown in Energy Sector
(electricity, heat, and transport): 73.2% Energy use in industry: 24.2% -- Iron
and Steel (7.2%): energy-related emissions from the manufacturing of iron and
steel. --    Chemical & petrochemical (3.6%): energy-related emissions from the
manufacturing of fertilizers, pharmaceuticals, refrigerants, oil and gas
extraction, etc. -- Food and tobacco (1%): energy-related emissions from the
manufacturing of tobacco products and food processing (the conversion of raw
agricultural products into their final products, such as the conversion of wheat
into bread). --  Non-ferrous metals: 0.7%: Non-ferrous metals are metals which
contain very little iron: this includes aluminium, copper, lead, nickel, tin,
titanium and zinc, and alloys such as brass. The manufacturing of these metals
requires energy which results in emissions. --       Paper & pulp
(0.6%): energy-related emissions from the conversion of wood into paper and
pulp. --       Machinery (0.5%): energy-related emissions from the production of
machinery. -- Other industry (10.6%): energy-related emissions from
manufacturing in other industries including mining and quarrying, construction,
textiles, wood products, and transport equipment (such as car manufacturing).
Transport: 16.2% This includes a small amount of electricity (indirect
emissions) as well as all direct emissions from burning fossil fuels to power
transport activities. These figures do not include emissions from the
manufacturing of motor vehicles or other transport equipment – this is included
in the previous point ‘Energy use in Industry’. --       Road transport
(11.9%): emissions from the burning of petrol and diesel from all forms of road
transport which includes cars, trucks, lorries, motorcycles and buses. Sixty
percent of road transport emissions <a href="https://www.iea.org/data-and-
statistics/charts/transport-sector-co2-emissions-by-mode-in-the-sustainable-
development-scenario-2000-2030">come from</a> passenger travel (cars,
motorcycles, and buses); and the remaining forty percent is from road freight
(lorries and trucks). This means that, if we could electrify the whole road
transport sector, and transition to a fully decarbonized electricity mix, we
could feasibly reduce global emissions by 11.9%. --      Aviation
(1.9%): emissions from passenger travel and freight, and domestic and
international aviation. 81% of aviation emissions come from passenger travel,
and 19% from freight.<a href="https://ourworldindata.org/ghg-emissions-by-
sector#note-5">5</a> From passenger aviation, 60% of emissions come from
international travel, and 40% from domestic. -- Shipping (1.7%): emissions from
the burning of petrol or diesel on boats. This includes both passenger and
freight maritime trips. --   Rail (0.4%): emissions from passenger and freight
rail travel. --       Pipeline (0.3%): fuels and commodities (e.g. oil, gas,
water or steam) often need to be transported (either within or between
countries) via pipelines. This requires energy inputs, which results in
emissions. Poorly constructed pipelines can also leak, leading to direct
emissions of methane to the atmosphere – however, this aspect is captured in the
category ‘Fugitive emissions from energy production’. Energy use in buildings:
17.5% -- Residential buildings (10.9%): energy-related emissions from the
generation of electricity for lighting, appliances, cooking, etc., and heating
at home. --     Commercial buildings (6.6%): energy-related emissions from the
generation of electricity for lighting, appliances, etc., and heating in
commercial buildings such as offices, restaurants, and shops. Energy use in
agriculture and fishing (1.7%) Energy-related emissions from the use of
machinery in agriculture and fishing, such as fuel for farm machinery and
fishing vessels Fugitive emissions from energy production: 5.8% --
Fugitive emissions from oil and gas (3.9%): fugitive emissions are the often-
accidental leakage of methane to the atmosphere during oil and gas extraction
and transportation, from damaged or poorly maintained pipes. This also includes
flaring – the intentional burning of gas at oil facilities. Oil wells can
release gases, including methane, during extraction – producers often don’t have
an existing network of pipelines to transport it, or it wouldn’t make economic
sense to provide the infrastructure needed to effectively capture and transport
it. But under environmental regulations they need to deal with it somehow:
intentionally burning it is often a cheap way to do so. --      Fugitive
emissions from coal (1.9%): fugitive emissions are the accidental leakage of
methane during coal mining Unallocated fuel combustion (7.8%) Energy-related
emissions from the production of energy from other fuels including electricity
and heat from biomass; on-site heat sources; combined heat and power (CHP);
nuclear industry; and pumped hydroelectric storage. This highlights the
significant impact that the energy sector has on global warming. It is crucial
to find sustainable alternatives and reduce our reliance on fossil fuels to
mitigate the effects of climate change. Transitioning to renewable energy
sources such as solar, wind, and hydroelectric power can play a pivotal role in
reducing CO2 emissions from the energy sector. Additionally, implementing
energy-efficient technologies and promoting conservation practices can further
contribute to mitigating climate change and adapting with the changing climate.
GHG Emissions from Energy Production CO2 emissions from energy combustion grew
by around 1.3% or 423 Mt in 2022, while CO2 emissions from industrial processes
declined by 102 Mt. Emissions growth in 2022 was below global GDP growth
(+3.2%), reverting to a decades long trend of decoupling emissions and economic
growth that was broken in 2021. Meanwhile, improvements in CO2 intensity of
energy use were slightly slower than the past decade’s (2012-2021) annual
average. There were divergent trends between regions and sectors. CO2 emissions
grew in North America and Asia (excluding People’s Republic of China,
outweighing reductions from Europe and China. At a global level, CO2 emissions
from power and transport (including international bunkers) grew by 261 Mt and
254 Mt, respectively, more than offsetting reductions from industry and
buildings. >A graph showing the growth of energy emissions Description
automatically generated< Over 40% of energy-related carbon dioxide (CO2)
emissions are due to the burning of fossil fuels for electricity generation.
Methane emissions are currently the second largest cause of global warming,
after carbon dioxide emissions. In the context of the energy sector, oil and gas
operations stand out as the largest sources of methane emissions. These
industries collectively contribute approximately 40 million tons (Mt) of methane
emissions each, highlighting the substantial environmental impact of fossil fuel
extraction and processing. Coal mining is another notable contributor to methane
emissions. During the mining process, methane trapped within coal seams is
released into the atmosphere, adding to the overall greenhouse gas emissions
from the energy sector. Additionally, the incomplete combustion of bioenergy,
primarily from the traditional use of biomass such as wood, charcoal, and
agricultural residues, also leads to methane emissions. This accounts for around
10 million tons of emissions. Nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions during energy
production are a significant environmental concern due to their high global
warming potential. While the amounts released per unit of energy are generally
lower than CO2, the high global warming potential of N2O makes these emissions
particularly impactful. The main sources of N2O emissions include fossil fuel
combustion, biomass burning, industrial processes like nitric acid production,
and agricultural activities related to biofuels. N2O emissions contribute to the
depletion of the ozone layer and are estimated to be 300 times more potent than
CO2 in terms of global warming potential. Efforts to reduce N2O emissions are
crucial in mitigating climate change and achieving sustainable energy
production. GHG Emissions from Energy Distribution The worldwide carbon
footprint of energy distribution encompasses the greenhouse gas emissions that
arise during the transportation of energy from its point of origin to the final
consumers. It encompasses the emissions generated during the transportation of
fuels, the construction and upkeep of infrastructure, and the operation of
energy distribution networks. Methane emissions from the energy distribution
section are primarily caused by leaks and venting of natural gas, which occur
during the transportation and storage of fossil fuels. Methane emissions from
pipelines make up a significant proportion of emissions from the oil and gas
industry, resulting from outdated or faulty equipment, inadequate inspection and
maintenance practices, and natural wear and tear on infrastructure. IEA
estimates that reducing methane emissions from pipelines could significantly
contribute to global efforts in combating climate change. GHG Emissions of
Energy Consumption The carbon footprint of buildings and household activities is
a significant concern in the context of global energy consumption and CO2
emissions. In 2021, the building and construction sector's operational energy-
related CO2 emissions were at an all-time high, reaching ten gigatons of CO2
equivalent. This was a 5% increase over 2020 levels and 2% over the pre-pandemic
peak in 2019. The rise in emissions was due to increased operational energy
demand for heating, cooling, lighting, and equipment in buildings. These figures
underscore the challenge in decarbonizing this sector, which is critical for
achieving the 2050 decarbonization pathway. Globally, operational energy use in
buildings accounts for about 30% of total final energy consumption, which
increases to 34% when including energy associated with the production of
building materials like cement, steel, and aluminum. In 2022, direct CO2
emissions from buildings decreased slightly, but indirect emissions, primarily
from electricity use, increased. This highlights the growing reliance on
electricity in buildings. Furthermore, emissions varied by region, with
decreases in some areas and increases in others due to factors like weather
conditions. To align with the Net Zero Emissions (NZE) Scenario, emissions need
to fall by 9% per year on average until 2030. How Climate Change Impacts Energy
systems? An energy system is a well-engineered system that is designed to supply
energy services to end users. Energy systems are also characterized as complex
networks of interconnected components that generates, transmits, distributes,
and consumes energy to meet the needs of communities. Energy systems depend upon
different primary energy sources categorized as non-renewable (coal, oil,
nuclear and natural gas) and renewable (solar, wind, biomass, hydroelectric and
geothermal). These critical components provide raw materials for energy
production. Changes in wind patterns and cloud cover often leads to
inconsistency of wind and solar power generation. Hydropower generation can be
also impacted by altered precipitation patterns and glacier melt. Recently
Zambia announced that it has reduced its power supply to Namibia due to drought
conditions that has affected its hydro power source. Moreso, some changes in
ground temperature and biomass availability can affect their efficiency. The
effects of Climate Change on Energy production Climate change has profound
effects on energy production across various sources and technologies. These
effects can disrupt energy production, increase operational costs, and pose
challenges to energy security. Climate change can stress the availability and
efficiency of renewable energy sources such as solar, wind and hydro electric
power. Some energy sources like biofuels derived from plants, algal or animal
biomass can heavily be impacted by increase or decrease in temperatures. An
example can be deduced from shortages in rainfall for crop yields such as
cassava, impacts on the acquisition of cassava for biofuels ethanol system.
Abrupt increases in temperatures are the primary contributors to declining
yields. Climate change can influence the availability and efficiency of
renewable energy sources such as solar, wind, and hydroelectric power. Changes
in weather patterns, such as alterations in wind speeds, precipitation levels,
and solar radiation, can impact the output of these renewable energy systems.
Changes in precipitation patterns and glacier melt rates affect water
availability for hydropower generation. Droughts can reduce water flow, leading
to decreased hydropower output, while extreme rainfall events can cause flooding
and damage to hydropower infrastructure. The International Energy Agency (IEA)
estimates that hydropower plans which have long lifespan from 50 to 100 years
are likely to be impacted by climate change. This is because of rising
temperatures that will alternate hydropower generation intensifying evaporation
losses. Rising temperatures can reduce the efficiency of thermal power plants,
including coal, gas, and nuclear facilities, by increasing cooling water demand
and reducing cooling system efficiency. Additionally, extreme weather events
like heatwaves and storms can disrupt thermal power plant operations and damage
infrastructure. We have discussed how climate change impacts on energy sources
above. In summary climate change stressors leads to the inefficiencies of
different energy sources such as solar, wind and hydro. What is clear from the
above discussion is that once the energy sources are affected some communities
can fail to adapt in their quest to resolve the menace of Climate Change. Below
we will discuss in detail on how climate change impacts on energy production.
Biofuels energy production --      Climate change on crop yield might primarily
affect the availability of bioenergy feedstock in different regions of the world
and therefore influence its substitution efficiency of traditional fossil energy
and create feedback to climate through changed GHG performance. --
Biofuels categorised into different generations ( first generation uses food
sources such as corn and sugarcane, the second and third generations focus on
non-food raw materials, like agricultural residues and algae while the fourth
generation each with its own specific characteristics’ in terms of raw materials
and production technologies are impacted differently by climate change. Wind
energy production Climate change can alter global wind patterns and regional
wind distributions due to changes in atmospheric circulation, sea surface
temperatures, and land-sea temperature gradients. These shifts can affect the
availability and predictability of wind resources in certain regions,
potentially reducing wind energy production. Moreover, climate change can lead
to increased variability in wind speeds, resulting in fluctuating wind energy
output and challenges in wind farm operations and grid integration. Extreme
weather events, such as hurricanes, storms, and heatwaves, can also cause short-
term spikes or drops in wind speeds, impacting wind turbine performance and
reliability. Solar Energy production Climate change can have various impacts on
solar energy production, affecting both photovoltaic (PV) solar panels and
concentrating solar power (CSP) systems. For instance, changes in cloud cover,
atmospheric conditions, and aerosol concentrations due to climate change can
lead to increased variability in sunlight availability. This variability can
affect daily and seasonal solar irradiance levels, leading to fluctuations in
solar energy production. Similarly, extreme weather events, such as dust storms,
wildfires, and volcanic eruptions, can reduce solar irradiance levels by
blocking sunlight and reducing air quality, impacting solar panel performance
and energy output. Solar panel efficiency decreases as temperatures rise,
leading to reduced energy production during hot weather conditions. Elevated
temperatures can also decrease the lifespan of solar panels and affect their
long-term performance. Hydro Energy Production Changes in precipitation will
also alter potential, generation output, peak level and seasonal variations of
hydropower. Increasingly erratic precipitation patterns such as the increasing
number of dry days may arouse concerns over interrupted hydropower generation
due to water shortages. A study by IEA shows that there is likely to be a
decline in hydropower capacity factor in most African countries. The study
distinguishes two scenarios, i.e (i) changes in hydropower capacity factor in
the Around 3°C Scenario, 2020-2099, and (ii) changes in hydropower capacity
factor in the Below 2°C Scenario, 2020-2099. One of the biggest challenges
caused by climate change is the increased year-to-year variability in hydropower
capacity factors. Increasing anomalies in climate patterns and more frequent
extreme weather events are likely to make the capacity factors of African
hydropower fluctuate more. In particular, most of the selected hydropower plants
(30 out of 32) in Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Morocco and Sudan are likely to
experience an increasing magnitude of fluctuation in their capacity factors for
the remainder of this century in both scenarios. During the latter 40 years of
this century, these hydropower plants are projected to see a higher variability
in capacity factors. The escalating variability in hydropower capacity factors
and output can significantly damage reliable electricity supply in these
countries. The impacts of climate change will be spread unevenly across the
continent. For instance, Morocco in North Africa is likely to experience the
largest drop in its hydropower capacity factor during the rest of the century,
while East African countries around the Nile basin are likely to see an
increase, benefiting from more frequent heavy rainfall. Thus, there is need to
prepare for strong resilience energy systems to adapt to changes in climatic
conditions. This will be dealt with below. Climate Change effects on Power
Generation Infrastructure – Climate change characterised by extreme weather
events such as hurricanes, wildfires and floods can lead to two main effects,
i.e infrastructure damage and efficiency reduction. a)       Infrastructure
damage -Infrastructure damage due to climate change poses significant challenges
to energy systems, affecting the reliability, resilience, and operational
efficiency of energy production, transmission, distribution, and storage.
Climate change can lead to facility damage. An example can be drawn from thermal
power plants, including coal-fired, natural gas-fired, and nuclear power plants,
can suffer damage from extreme weather events such as hurricanes, floods,
wildfires, and heatwaves. Similarly, solar panels, wind turbines, and
hydroelectric dams are vulnerable to extreme weather events and environmental
changes, leading to physical damage and reduced energy production. Due to
climate change some transmission and Distribution Networks can be damaged, ie.
lines, substations, transformers, and other grid infrastructure are susceptible
to damage from extreme weather events like hurricanes, tornadoes, ice storms,
and wildfires. One can also note that coastal and low-lying areas with energy
infrastructure are at risk from sea-level rise, storm surges, and increased
precipitation, leading to flooding and infrastructure damage. To add to this,
Energy Storage Facilities such as the Battery Systems are vulnerable to extreme
temperatures, flooding, and other climate-related hazards, leading to reduced
efficiency, capacity loss, and operational challenges. b)      Efficiency
reduction : Efficiency reduction refers to the decrease in the efficiency of
energy production, conversion, transmission, or consumption processes, leading
to higher energy losses and increased energy consumption for the same output or
service. Thus efficiency reduction due to climate change impacts can result in
higher energy consumption, increased operational costs, and reduced system
reliability for energy producers and consumers. Energy systems such as Thermal
Power plants can suffer from heat stress when higher temperatures affects the
cooling systems and increase the cooling demand. If this is not attended to, it
often leads to reduction in the efficiency of thermal power plants. In solar
power plants in the event of high or lower temperatures, climate change leads to
decreased electricity generation from solar photovoltaic systems. While with
wind turbines, changes in wind patterns / high speeds due to climate variability
leads to reduced energy production. Impacts of Climate Change on Energy
distribution = Energy distribution requires different infrastructure. Climate
change exerts significant pressures on energy distribution systems, affecting
their reliability, resilience, and efficiency. These changes in climate patterns
and extreme weather events introduce challenges that energy distribution
networks must adapt to. One of the primary challenges faced by energy
distribution systems due to climate change is the increased frequency and
intensity of extreme weather events. Hurricanes, tornadoes, floods, wildfires,
and heatwaves are becoming more frequent and severe, causing damage to
distribution infrastructure such as power lines, substations, transformers, and
distribution poles. This physical damage disrupts the flow of electricity,
leading to power outages and affecting the reliability of energy supply to
consumers and businesses. Furthermore, rising temperatures and changing
precipitation patterns influence the demand for energy, especially for cooling
during heatwaves and heating during cold spells. Higher temperatures increase
the demand for air conditioning, putting stress on the distribution networks and
potentially leading to overloads or failures during peak demand periods.
Increased Energy Demand due to climate change can lead to increased energy
demand for cooling in summer months, straining grid capacity and potentially
causing overloads, voltage fluctuations, and grid instability. In contrast,
changing precipitation patterns and drought conditions can affect water
availability for hydropower generation and cooling systems, impacting energy
production and distribution. Sea-level rise and storm surges associated with
climate change pose additional risks to coastal and low-lying energy
distribution infrastructure such as substations and transmission lines,
increasing the risk of saltwater intrusion and flooding. Furthermore, Coastal
substations, transformers, and power lines are vulnerable to flooding, saltwater
intrusion, and erosion, leading to equipment damage, corrosion, and operational
disruptions. Offshore wind farms and energy infrastructure are also at risk from
sea-level rise and storm damage, affecting their operational reliability and
lifespan. Climate change poses risks to energy distribution infrastructure,
including power lines, substations, and pipelines. Extreme weather events like
hurricanes, floods, and wildfires can damage distribution networks, leading to
service outages and disruptions in energy supply. Climate change on Grid
variability Climate change can challenge the reliability and resilience of
electricity grids by causing temperature extremes, variability in renewable
energy generation, and increased frequency and intensity of extreme weather
events, requiring grid modernization, reinforcement, and resilience
measures.sult in equipment damage, corrosion, and electrical failures. Climate
change on Fuel Supply Chains: --    Transportation Disruptions: Extreme weather
events, floods, and storms can disrupt transportation networks, ports, and
shipping routes, affecting the delivery of natural gas, and biomass fuels to
power plants, refineries, and consumers. -- Resource Availability: Changes in
precipitation patterns, water availability, and temperature extremes can impact
the availability and quality of water resources for cooling systems in thermal
power plants and energy production processes, affecting fuel extraction,
processing, and power generation. --  Supply Chain Resilience: Climate change
can challenge the resilience of fuel supply chains by increasing the frequency
and severity of extreme weather events, temperature extremes, and sea-level
rise, requiring adaptive measures, diversification of fuel sources, and enhanced
supply chain management practices. Impacts of Climate Change on Energy
Consumption Energy consumption refers to the amount of energy used by
individuals, households, businesses, industries, and transportation sectors to
meet their energy needs for various purposes, such as heating, cooling,
lighting, transportation, manufacturing, and other activities. Energy
consumption is a critical aspect of economic development, quality of life, and
environmental sustainability. Climate change exerts a substantial influence on
global energy consumption patterns, reshaping the demand for energy across
various sectors and regions. The complex interplay between climate change and
energy consumption is driven by a range of factors, including temperature
variations, precipitation changes, and extreme weather events. Here are some key
aspects of energy consumption. One of the most pronounced impacts of climate
change on energy consumption lies in the realm of cooling demand. As
temperatures around the world continue to rise, the demand for cooling systems
and air conditioning in residential, commercial, and industrial buildings is
escalating. Heatwaves, which are becoming more frequent and intense due to
climate change, drive up the need for indoor cooling to maintain comfort and
safety. This surge in cooling demand places significant stress on electricity
grids, particularly during peak demand periods, leading to potential supply
shortages and grid instability. The increased reliance on cooling systems also
results in higher energy consumption from fossil fuel-fired power plants, which
not only strains the energy infrastructure but also contributes to further
greenhouse gas emissions, exacerbating the cycle of climate change. Conversely,
changes in temperature and precipitation patterns also play a pivotal role in
shaping heating energy demand. In regions experiencing milder winters due to
climate change, there is a reduction in the need for heating systems, leading to
decreased energy consumption. However, in areas facing more frequent and severe
cold spells, heating energy demand might increase, offsetting the reductions
seen in regions with milder winters. These variations in heating demand create a
complex energy consumption landscape that requires dynamic and adaptive energy
planning and management strategies. The transportation sector, a significant
consumer of energy globally, is also impacted by climate change in profound
ways. Rising temperatures influence travel patterns, vehicle efficiency, and
fuel consumption, leading to changes in energy demand. Higher temperatures can
reduce the efficiency of internal combustion engines and air conditioning
systems in vehicles, resulting in increased fuel consumption per kilometer
traveled. Moreover, changes in precipitation patterns and extreme weather events
can affect road conditions, traffic congestion, and transportation logistics,
influencing fuel consumption and energy use in the transportation sector. In the
agricultural sector, climate change introduces new dynamics in energy
consumption related to farming practices, crop yields, and food production
processes. Changes in temperature, precipitation, and water availability
influence the demand for energy in irrigation, machinery operation, and food
processing. Drought conditions and water scarcity can increase energy
consumption for irrigation systems, while changes in crop planting and
harvesting seasons can impact the use of agricultural machinery and equipment,
leading to variations in energy demand. Furthermore, the industrial sector,
characterized by energy-intensive processes and operations, faces unique
challenges in the wake of climate change. Rising temperatures can affect
industrial processes, equipment performance, and cooling requirements,
influencing energy consumption and operational efficiency. Additionally, extreme
weather events and supply chain disruptions associated with climate change can
impact industrial production, energy use, and energy management strategies. In
summary climate change is fundamentally altering the dynamics of global energy
consumption across various energy systems, introducing new challenges and
complexities. Below we give important points to remember : Estimating the
impacts of future climate change on energy demand mostly uses two most common
variables, the heating degree days (HDD) and cooling degree days (CDD). Below we
discuss how climate change impacts on consumption --      Increased Demand:
Climate change can lead to higher energy demand for cooling purposes in response
to rising temperatures. Increased use of air conditioning and refrigeration
contributes to peak electricity demand, particularly during heatwaves, straining
energy systems and potentially causing blackouts or brownouts. --
Efficiency Challenges: Climate change impacts energy consumption by influencing
building energy demands and heating/cooling requirements. Warmer temperatures
may increase the need for air conditioning in summer, while milder winters may
reduce heating demand. However, extreme weather events can also challenge energy
efficiency efforts by causing temperature fluctuations and increasing energy
consumption for heating or cooling. --       Behavioral Changes: Climate change
awareness can influence consumer behavior, leading to shifts in energy
consumption patterns and preferences for more sustainable energy sources. For
example, there may be increased interest in energy-efficient appliances, home
insulation, and renewable energy systems as individuals seek to reduce their
carbon footprint and adapt to changing environmental conditions. To navigate
these complex challenges and uncertainties, there is a growing emphasis on
enhancing energy efficiency, promoting renewable energy adoption, and
implementing demand-side management strategies across various energy systems.
Energy efficiency measures, such as building insulation, energy-efficient
appliances, and vehicle fuel efficiency standards, are crucial in reducing
energy consumption and mitigating the impacts of climate change. Renewable
energy sources, such as solar, wind, and geothermal energy, offer sustainable
alternatives to fossil fuels, helping to decarbonize the energy sector and
reduce greenhouse gas emissions. In conclusion, climate change is reshaping the
global energy consumption landscape across different energy systems, affecting
cooling and heating demand, transportation energy use, agricultural practices,
and industrial operations. The multifaceted impacts of climate change on energy
consumption require integrated and adaptive strategies, policies, and
technologies to enhance energy efficiency, promote renewable energy adoption,
and build a more resilient and sustainable energy future. Generation: Due to
flooding and excessive debris, two major hydropower plants in Malawi were
damaged and went offline, reducing Malawi’s hydropower capacity by more than 80%
(Centre for Disaster Philanthropy, 2019; The Watchers, 2019). It caused
widespread disruptions in electricity supply for several days (ReliefWeb, 2019).
Transmission and distribution: The transmission lines from Mozambique to South
Africa were damaged by the cyclone and created a loss of 1 100 MW of power. It
forced Eskom, South Africa’s electricity utility, to implement load-shedding to
prevent putting more demand on the grid. At the height of the crisis, South
Africans had their power interrupted twelve times in a four-day period (CFR,
2019). Demand: Due to the interrupted electricity supply from the central grids
after Tropical Cyclone Idai, electricity demand patterns in South Africa were
markedly changed. Demand for diesel jumped as the disruption resulted in the use
of back-up generators (CFR, 2019). Generation: Due to flooding and excessive
debris, two major hydropower plants in Malawi were damaged and went offline,
reducing Malawi’s hydropower capacity by more than 80% (Centre for Disaster
Philanthropy, 2019; The Watchers, 2019). It caused widespread disruptions in
electricity supply for several days (ReliefWeb, 2019). Transmission and
distribution: The transmission lines from Mozambique to South Africa were
damaged by the cyclone and created a loss of 1 100 MW of power. It forced Eskom,
South Africa’s electricity utility, to implement load-shedding to prevent
putting more demand on the grid. At the height of the crisis, South Africans had
their power interrupted twelve times in a four-day period (CFR, 2019). Demand:
Due to the interrupted electricity supply from the central grids after Tropical
Cyclone Idai, electricity demand patterns in South Africa were markedly changed.
Demand for diesel jumped as the disruption resulted in the use of back-up
generators (CFR, 2019). Case Study : Cyclone Idai Mozambique, Malawi and
Zimbabwe Land use changes and habitat destruction due to energy infrastructure
development. The development of energy infrastructure to adapt or mitigate
against climate change often result in land use changes and habitat destruction
poor planning is adopted. There are significant environmental impacts associated
with the development and expansion of energy infrastructure. Development
practioners often grapple with projects that potentially harm the environment in
light of just energy transition. Its important to underscore that practises such
as mining to extract minerals for energy transition such lithium , copper pose a
serious risk to the environment. Iorder to circumvent this, environment impact
assessments and other due diligence mechanisms prior to adopting certain energy
infrastructure development projects are important. A <a
href="https://www.nature.com/articles/s41893-022-00994-6">study</a> published
in Nature Sustainability shows 77% of global initiatives for the extraction of
energy transition minerals are located on or near community land in Africa. <a
href="https://www.iea.org/reports/the-role-of-critical-minerals-in-clean-energy-
transitions/executive-summary">The International Energy Agency</a> (IEA) argues
that solar photovoltaic plants, wind farms and electric vehicles “generally
require more minerals to build than their fossil fuel-based counterparts.” For
instance, IEA cites that a typical electric car will require “six times the
mineral inputs of a conventional car and an onshore wind plant requires nine
times more mineral resources than a gas-fired plant. Ecological systems are
increasingly affected by novel disturbance regimes that wildlife species have
not experienced historically. Disturbances caused by humans have led to
fragmented landscapes The expansion of energy infrastructure undoubtedly lead to
risks and disturbances in most ecosystems, this often leads to uncertainty about
how species can respond to altered landscapes. Different types of human
disturbances may also vary in how they are arranged on the landscape, such as
linear features (e.g., roads, power lines) or grouped features (e.g., mining,
oil extraction, and wind-energy infrastructure) the type and intensity of
disturbances these species encounter also presumably vary. Human disturbances
and infrastructure have been shown to interrupt migration, increase reposition
movements, or delay departure in migratory species (<a href="https://www.frontie
rsin.org/articles/10.3389/fevo.2022.931260/full#B25">Dussault et al.,
2007</a>, <a href="https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fevo.2022.931260
/full#B89">Seidler et al., 2015</a>, <a href="https://www.frontiersin.org/articl
es/10.3389/fevo.2022.931260/full#B109">Wilson R. R. et al., 2016</a>) Below we
will discuss how different energy infrastructure development affects the land
and habitats. 1)   Energy Minerals extraction – -- mineral mining for energy
transition requires clearing large areas of land, including forests and
ecosystems, to access underground reserves. This can result in habitat
destruction, fragmentation, and loss of biodiversity. There are, however,
opportunities with mineral mining for energy transition. Nature Africa cites
that different African countries have been affected by renewable energy
development and mineral mining for green energy transition. It further states
that, Côte d’Ivoire has lost 99 square kilometres <a
href="https://www.pnas.org/doi/full/10.1073/pnas.2118273119">of its
forest</a> while Angola, Democratic Republic of Congo, Gabon, Guinea,
Mozambique, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Tanzania and Zambia have also lost rainforest
cover to mining activities. Infrastructure development can further degrade
ecosystems and alter natural hydrological patterns In Ghana, Environmentalists
warn the increasing demand for critical minerals such as bauxite, lithium and
cobalt — the minerals used in green energy transition solutions such as electric
vehicles and solar panels — is a threat to biodiversity. In Ghana,
Environmentalists warn the increasing demand for critical minerals such as
bauxite, lithium and cobalt — the minerals used in green energy transition
solutions such as electric vehicles and solar panels — is a threat to
biodiversity. 2)  Hydropower Dams and Reservoirs: --      Large hydroelectric
dams are amongst the most controversial of all types of development projects.
Critics of large hydroelectric projects point to a wide range of negative
environmental and related social impacts, from the destruction of unique
biodiversity to the displacement of vulnerable human populations. --       Dams:
The construction of hydropower dams involves flooding large areas of land to
create reservoirs, which can submerge forests, wetlands, and agricultural areas.
This alteration of river ecosystems can lead to habitat loss, displacement of
wildlife, and changes in water quality and flow regimes. --   Reservoirs: The
formation of reservoirs behind dams can alter local microclimates, disrupt
migratory routes for fish and other aquatic species, and degrade riparian
habitats along riverbanks. The Mphanda Nkuwa project involves building a dam
about 60 kilometres downstream from the existing dam at Cahora Bassa, and a
power station that will generate 1,500 megawatts of electricity. There will also
be a high voltage transmission line running for 1,300 kilometres from the
Zambezi Valley to Maputo .The Mphanda Nkuwa hydro-electric project, on the
Zambezi river, in the central Mozambican province of Tete, is still dependent on
the updating of the environmental and social impact studies that could guide the
financial model of the project, Environmental studies are needed to structure
the investment, maintain the downstream environmental balance, and safeguard the
needs, land-use planning and safety of the population The Mphanda Nkuwa project
involves building a dam about 60 kilometres downstream from the existing dam at
Cahora Bassa, and a power station that will generate 1,500 megawatts of
electricity. There will also be a high voltage transmission line running for
1,300 kilometres from the Zambezi Valley to Maputo .The Mphanda Nkuwa hydro-
electric project, on the Zambezi river, in the central Mozambican province of
Tete, is still dependent on the updating of the environmental and social impact
studies that could guide the financial model of the project, Environmental
studies are needed to structure the investment, maintain the downstream
environmental balance, and safeguard the needs, land-use planning and safety of
the population 3)        Renewable Energy Infrastructure: Renewable power
infrastructure can affect biodiversity in various ways across its lifecycle. If
not appropriately mitigated, these effects can lead to significant declines in
species’ populations, ecosystem integrity and resilience. In the International
Energy Agency’s net zero emissions by 2050 scenario, global electricity demand
increases 150% by 2050. Renewables generate almost 90% of global electricity in
2050, up from 30% in 2022. The combined capacity of solar photovoltaics and wind
power increases more than four-fold from 2022-30 and almost thirteen-fold from
2022-50. Without careful planning, renewable power expansion could significantly
harm biodiversity. --    Solar Farms: Large-scale solar energy projects require
extensive land for the installation of photovoltaic panels, which can lead to
land conversion from natural habitats or agricultural use. However, careful
siting and land-use planning can minimize impacts on sensitive ecosystems. --
Wind Farms: Wind energy developments, including wind farms and associated
infrastructure such as access roads and transmission lines, can fragment
habitats, disturb wildlife, and interfere with bird migration routes. Offshore
wind farms also have potential impacts on marine habitats and species. In the
USA , there is use of tehnological algorithm sought to select proposed
development sites that maximized wind power potential and minimized whooping
crane habitat loss. Most migratory waterbirds require networks of patchily
distributed and ephemeral wetland habitats as stopover sites (Merken et al.,
2015, Xu et al., 2019). However, human presence and vehicle disturbance have
been shown to displace waterbirds at coastal stopover sites during migration
(Pfister et al., 1992, Tarr et al., 2010); thus, it is plausible that human
disturbances could functionally alter stopover availability. The interplay
between fine-scale natural variation in stopover sites and human disturbance
could make conservation planning a difficult task for this group of species In
the USA , there is use of tehnological algorithm sought to select proposed
development sites that maximized wind power potential and minimized whooping
crane habitat loss. Most migratory waterbirds require networks of patchily
distributed and ephemeral wetland habitats as stopover sites (Merken et al.,
2015, Xu et al., 2019). However, human presence and vehicle disturbance have
been shown to displace waterbirds at coastal stopover sites during migration
(Pfister et al., 1992, Tarr et al., 2010); thus, it is plausible that human
disturbances could functionally alter stopover availability. The interplay
between fine-scale natural variation in stopover sites and human disturbance
could make conservation planning a difficult task for this group of species Case
Study Windpower development and impact on land use and habitants Not only does
climate change impact on energy systems. Transmission losses over long distances
can impact energy systems. This mandates the need for proper energy planning,
demand side management and energy efficiency. --  Bioenergy Crops: Bioenergy
production, such as the cultivation of crops for biofuels, can compete with food
production and natural ecosystems for land resources, leading to deforestation,
habitat conversion, and loss of biodiversity. Extreme weather conditions like
heavy winds in typhoons, a severe weather event frequently approaching this
region. They had devastating impacts on cassava in the field of Guangxi, as well
as on biofuel production in the Philippines The German bioenergy strategy
framework demonstrated relevant drivers for long-term development potentials,
including land-use change, installed capacities, technological development and
lifetime, and competitiveness of bioenergy provision concepts. Constructing a
machine learning model describing the long-term relationship between cassava
yield and local natural and social characteristics such as climate, topography,
soil conditions, operation and management habits, The German bioenergy strategy
framework demonstrated relevant drivers for long-term development potentials,
including land-use change, installed capacities, technological development and
lifetime, and competitiveness of bioenergy provision concepts. Constructing a
machine learning model describing the long-term relationship between cassava
yield and local natural and social characteristics such as climate, topography,
soil conditions, operation and management habits, 4)   Transmission and
Distribution Networks: --      Power Lines: The construction of transmission
lines and distribution networks often requires clearing vegetation and acquiring
rights-of-way across large areas of land. This can fragment habitats, disrupt
wildlife corridors, and increase the risk of habitat fragmentation and wildlife
mortality due to electrocution. -- Pipeline Networks: The installation of oil
and gas pipelines can result in habitat fragmentation, soil erosion, and
contamination of water bodies, particularly in ecologically sensitive areas such
as wetlands, forests, and riparian zones. How to address Land use changes and
habitat destruction due to energy infrastructure development To mitigate the
negative impacts of energy infrastructure development on land use and habitats,
halting and reversing biodiversity loss demands --      an integrated approach
that capitalises on environmental planning, impact assessments, and regulatory
measures. -- Effective biodiversity mainstreaming not only mitigates adverse
impacts on biodiversity, but can also expedite renewable power permitting,
reduce project delays and cancellations, and avoid greenhouse gas emissions from
ecosystem conversion. This may involve identifying and protecting ecologically
valuable areas, implementing measures to minimize habitat disturbance and
fragmentation, restoring degraded landscapes, and compensating for unavoidable
impacts through habitat restoration or conservation offsets. --  Additionally,
incorporating principles of sustainable land use and ecosystem-based approaches
into energy planning can help minimize conflicts between energy development and
environmental conservation goals. --      Leverage the full range of demand-side
mitigation measures, including technological and social innovations, to improve
energy efficiency and change consumer behaviour to reduce energy demand. Apply a
systems approach to the (re-)design of energy end-use systems, to use less
energy and materials. --     Consider biodiversity impacts when selecting among
power sector technologies and capacity expansion options! -- Integrate spatially
explicit biodiversity data into power system modelling to identify capacity
expansion options that are low cost, low emissions, and low risk for
biodiversity. --   Evaluate the relative cumulative biodiversity impacts of
capacity expansion options through appropriate environmental assessments. --
Integrate ecosystem service values and biodiversity related measures into cost-
benefit analysis or multi-criteria decision analysis tools used to appraise
technology choices and capacity expansion options. --        Prioritise areas of
low ecological sensitivity and avoid the most ecologically sensitive areas. --
Develop biodiversity-explicit spatial plans for renewable power infrastructure,
stipulating no go areas and areas of low ecological risk where renewable power
projects should be prioritised. -- Ensure that siting decisions for utility-
scale power projects account for potential cumulative impacts.” -- Accelerate
solar rooftop deployment, e.g. by mandating them for public buildings and new
builds. y Promote research and development of technologies and approaches to co-
locate solar, wind and power lines with other infrastructure and activities. --
Adapt land and sea-use regulations to facilitate co-location and the siting of
renewable power in areas of low ecological risk, e.g. brownfield sites;
abandoned agricultural land. --        Develop policies and guidance to ensure
that power projects effectively mitigate adverse impacts on biodiversity. --
Review requirements, processes and guidance for environmental impact assessment
and permitting, to promote efficiency and ensure risks to biodiversity are
effectively addressed. --    Ensure renewable power companies and utilities
strictly adhere to the Mitigation Hierarchy (avoid, minimise,
restore/rehabilitate and where appropriate offset) to address biodiversity
impacts. --     Establish “no net loss” (or “net biodiversity gain”)
requirements for new infrastructure projects, including power sector
infrastructure, accompanied by robust metrics and methods for verification. --
Adopt standards to promote infrastructure designs and operational practices with
lower-risk to biodiversity (e.g. bird-safe power-line design; minimum cut-in-
speed for wind turbines). --     Encourage or require renewable power companies
and their investors to conduct due diligence in line with the OECD’s Due
Diligence Guidance for Responsible Business Conduct. -- Require post-
construction monitoring and reporting to ensure that environmental assessment
recommendations and permitting requirements are respected and to inform adaptive
management. --      Strengthen the quality and transparency of data on
biodiversity and renewable power interactions. -- Support development and
application of environmental sensitivity mapping tools to inform project siting
decisions. --      Develop protocols and guidelines for monitoring biodiversity
impacts from renewable power. Encourage coordination across projects to evaluate
and address their cumulative impacts. -- Require sharing of data from SEA, EIA,
other pre-construction surveys and post-construction monitoring. Establish or
support development of open access data platforms to share data. -- Support
targeted research to address knowledge gaps on the impacts of renewable power on
biodiversity and the effectiveness of mitigation measures. Developing strategies
for addressing the siting of new wind infrastructure developments at the
intersection of clean energy and biological conservation is of increasing
importance for the conservation of species that potentially interact with wind
towers (<a href="https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fevo.2022.931260/f
ull#B92">Shaffer et al., 2019</a>). Developing strategies for addressing the
siting of new wind infrastructure developments at the intersection of clean
energy and biological conservation is of increasing importance for the
conservation of species that potentially interact with wind towers (<a href="htt
ps://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fevo.2022.931260/full#B92">Shaffer et
al., 2019</a>). Chapter Two: Sustainable Energy as a Tool for Climate Mitigation
Sustainable energy is critical to support climate change mitigation by reducing
greenhouse gas emissions. Renewable energy sources – which are available in
abundance all around us, provided by the sun, wind, water, waste, and heat from
the Earth – are replenished at a higher rate than they are consumed. They emit
little to no greenhouse gases or pollutants into the air. Renewables are
available in every country, and their potential has yet to be fully realized.
Renewables provide better energy security and a path out of import dependency,
allowing countries to diversify their economies and protect themselves from the
volatile price swings of fossil fuels, all while generating inclusive economic
growth, new jobs, and poverty alleviation. Regardless, the way we produce and
consume energy is the leading driver of the climate crisis. Fossil Fuels account
for more than 80% of global energy production. In 2023, the effects of climate
change were more visible globally. The year was the warmest on record globally,
with disastrous natural disasters such as floods, wildfires, droughts,
landslides, cyclones, and storms. These disasters displaced and killed tens of
thousands of people worldwide. To reduce emissions by half by 2030, we
collectively need to end our reliance on fossil fuels and invest in alternative
sources of energy that are clean, accessible, affordable, sustainable, and
reliable. The figures below showcase the comparison between annual carbon
dioxide emissions and renewable energy share of total final consumption of
countries. Figure XX: Renewable Share of Total Final Energy Consumption, by
Country, 2021 >A map of the world with different colored countries/regions
Description automatically generated< FigureXX: Annual CO₂ emissions including
land-use change, 2021 >A map of the world Description automatically generated<
(Global Carbon Budget (2023) – with major processing by Our World in Data.
“Annual CO₂ emissions including land-use change – GCB” [dataset]. Global Carbon
Project, “Global Carbon Budget” [original data].) Box: Recent developments in
energy --  90 countries had nationwide renewable energy targets as of 2023 --
At the UNFCCC’s COP28, 130 countries pledged to triple the world’s renewable
energy capacity and double the annual rate of energy efficiency improvements by
2030. --   The revised EU Renewable Energy Directive of 2023 sets a new target
of 42.5% of renewable energy by 2030 and aims for 45%. Member States have since
submitted their renewable energy targets for sub-sectors including transport,
buildings and industry. --    Renewable hydrogen strategies had been adopted by
41 countries by the end of 2023, with the EU launching a European Hydrogen Bank
to support the regional market with EUR 800 million (USD 862 million) in
subsidies. Renewable Energy Technologies Solar Energy What is Solar Power’s role
and use? Solar power is the most abundant and renewable source of energy derived
from the sun’s radiation; it’s also one of the cleanest. Solar technologies are
versatile in their use because they find use in electricity generation,
illumination, climate control, and water heating in all settings: home,
business, or industry. Even when it’s cloudy out, energy can be obtained
directly from the sun. Solar technologies transform sunlight into electric power
by means of photovoltaic panels as well as mirrors that focus solar radiation.
Solar photovoltaic (PV): Based on technological innovation that promotes energy
generation, PV uses solar panels, which are electronic devices also known as
solar cells, to convert sunlight directly to electricity. This indicates that
there is a great deal of flexibility when it comes to the size and type of solar
PV technology available in different forms such as small solar home kits,
rooftop installations, or even large systems with capacities up to hundreds of
megawatts. Global additions to renewable power capacity increased an estimated
36% in 2023 to reach around 473 gigawatts (GW), a new record for the 22nd
consecutive year. Solar PV drove the increase and accounted for three-quarters
of all the renewable power capacity additions in 2023. Concentrated solar power
(CSP): Mirrors are used to focus the sunlight, which leads to heating of a fluid
and the generation of steam that powers a turbine for electricity production.
CSP creates electric power within extensive power stations. At the end of 2020,
the worldwide installed capacity of CSP came up to 7 GW, indicating a quintuple
increase since 2010-2020. In turn, one important advantage provided by a CSP
power plant over the solar PV power plant is its capability of storing heat in
molten salts so that it can still produce energy even when night has come. Solar
Power as a Tool for Climate Mitigation and Sustainable Development Solar power
is regarded as a major source of renewable energy and will help reduce the
release of carbon emissions. For instance, in the US, the carbon emissions of a
gas-electric power plant on a life cycle basis are found to be 1,071 pounds per
MW-h. In contrast, for solar PV energy, this value decreases to approximately 95
pounds per MW-h. Utility-scale solar electricity generates 394–447 MWh per acre
each year. Thus, when solar panels are used to replace natural gas, an acre of
solar panels saves around 385,000 to 436,000 pounds (175 to 198 metric tones) of
CO2 each year. From 2010 to 2020, the price per watt of commercial solar panels
was cut from about $3.5 to $0.24, which was a 93% decrease. They are readily
accessible through reasonable pricing; in addition, they have become the
cheapest available source of electricity. Also, the fuel prices globally are
high; as such the cost of solar PV is cheaper than other fuels even with
inflation, higher interest rates, and component shortages leading to solar
projects becoming more expensive. Solar panels have a lifespan of roughly 30
years and come in diverse ways depending on the type of material used in
manufacturing. After the CSP market has developed, the price for thermal energy
storage decreased. Now, 12-hour storage is possible for an economically viable
cost. It has facilitated a lengthening of the storage time in CSP projects. CSP
with less expensive heating storage systems has the capacity to include more
variable solar and wind integration, indicating that CSP representation in the
future is going to be more vital. Moreover, as the renewable energy market grows
so does the need for specialized workers, creating an employment market. Two-
thirds of renewable energy employment was based in Asia, and China alone was
home to 41%. Around one-third of all renewable energy jobs are in solar PV,
totaling 4.9 million in 2022. Applications of Solar Power Transportation:
Electric vehicles, whether privately owned vehicles or even larger procurement
vehicles such as trucks, must recharge at charging stations. It is found that a
hectare of solar panels delivers between 48 and 112 times more driving distance,
when used to charge an electric vehicle than that land could deliver if used to
grow biofuels for cars. This is on top of the fact that electric vehicles
produce much fewer emissions than gas powered. Solar Heating (water and
buildings): Heating and cooling systems are responsible for 50-60% of the energy
bill of hospitals and offices. Energy demand for air conditioning tripled
between 1990 and 2016, reaching 8.7% of total global energy demand, and it could
triple again by 2050. Solar water heating is an eco-friendly alternative to
traditional methods. These solar water systems use direct circulation systems
and indirect circulation systems. These systems heat water to temperatures
between 60-80℃. Adopting more energy-efficient heating and cooling procedures
has become a top focus for reducing building energy usage. Solar heating for
buildings similarly collects solar radiation to heat water, air, or storage
devices. Solar Distillation: Water scarcity in arid and coastal regions can
benefit from their abundant sunlight. This process uses the energy from the sun
to evaporate freshwater from the sea, distilling it into safe and drinkable
water. This can supply clean drinking water in areas of scarcity. Solar-Pumping:
Solar pumping uses solar-generated electricity to pump water for agriculture.
The need for water pumping is greatest during the hot summer months, which
coincides with higher solar radiation, hence this technology is best suited for
irrigation purposes. The demand for pumping water is highest especially during
dry season which is usually the hot summer months. At this period, solar
radiation is at the maximum making this technology the best suited for the use
of irrigation. When days are cloudy and clear skies are rare, solar insolation
is also low hence, the events such as water pumping are minimized since crop
transpiration is low. Solar Drying for Agriculture: Sun dryers, that can be made
out of inexpensive materials such as cement, galvanized iron, and plywood, work
by extracting humidity the winds and sun to lower the moisture content. These
smart dryers constantly heat the air to a steady temperature and thereby provide
the ideal drying conditions. Inlet and outlets that are already predetermined,
solar ventilators and the ventilation control systems improve quality of the
product is enhanced, and the drying time within the solar drying is shorter than
that of sun drying. There are different solar dryers those are utilized for
drying different types of agricultural products. For example, fruits,
vegetables, and aromatic plants are included in these types of products. Solar
Thermal Production: Solar thermal energy can be used to heat both water and air.
It is an alternative to gas, oil, and other heating systems that use carbon-
based electricity. Solar thermal energy is a low-carbon, renewable energy
source. Its use produces fewer greenhouse gasses than fossil fuels. Solar
thermal panels emit a similar amount of CO2 as photovoltaic panels:
approximately 44 gCO2e/kWh (compared to 418 gCO2e/kWh for a gas-fired power
station). Solar thermal energy emits 10x less CO2e/kWh than gas-fired power
facilities. Solar Greenhouses: A green house is a building with a transparent
outer cover made of glass or plastic that captures sunlight to intensify
heating, enabling the growth of plants. Since there is no air mixing between the
greenhouse and surrounding environments due to the closed boundary of the
greenhouse structure, the air inside the greenhouse becomes enriched with CO2.
Furthermore, because of the limited transpiration, there is less moisture loss.
All of these characteristics support plant growth all year round, not just
during the day but also at night. What are the Challenges to Solar Power
Implementation? Grid Resilience: Solar power is variable, meaning it does not
always have a fixed pattern for everyone. This means that processes must be put
into place to deal with this variability. Stakeholders would have to invest in
research and development to ensure that the correct plans are in place to suit
the environment. Transmission cables linking different regions, electricity
storage, and policies can be used to supplement demand. In order to supplement
demand, transmission cables can be used to link regions. Cost for Lower-Income
Countries: Capital costs in less-developed countries are higher than in
developed countries. this makes it increasingly difficult to fund Solar PV
energy projects. Developing countries face higher capital costs due to concerns
about governance, currency fluctuations, and convertibility, among other
factors. Figure XX: Weighted Average Cost of Capital for Onshore Wind Power and
Solar PV, by Country Income Level, 2022 >A graph of a graph of income
Description automatically generated with medium confidence< Access to funding:
The solar energy transition is challenged by the availability of finance.
Usually, large solar-powered systems are funded and developed in high-income
countries. Low-income countries either lack the means or receive insufficient
funding to execute an energy transition. However, it is important also to
consider that High-Income countries emit considerably more GHG emissions than
Less-Developed countries, thus requiring a more rapid and thorough transition.
Supply of Minerals: The Solar Power transition requires key materials. It could
make up as much as 90% of the demand for lithium by the year 2040—along with 40%
of the demand for copper and rare earth elements, and up to 70% of the demand
for nickel and cobalt. If the systems in place are not ready for such demand in
the future, other sources of energy will have to be relied upon such as fossil
fuels. Wind Power Wind power's role and use Wind power, or wind energy, is a
different source of renewable energy that can harness the potential energy in
wind through wind turbines, which convert the turning motion of blades, driven
by moving air into electrical energy. The wind turbines release only a minimal
amount of greenhouse gases compared to of other sources of power. Wind turbines
that are placed appropriately can generate tremendous amounts of electricity,
therefore, it is a great option to supply power. Wind energy has a very long
geographical supply chain and is already well-established technology. Within the
last five, onshore wind power management has developed to generate more power
per megawatt of added capacity. To the forecast in coming years, offshore wind
is expected to rise, since more turbines are set up in the sea to make use of
stronger winds. Global wind resources much outweigh the world's present
electricity needs, and the levelized cost of energy produced by wind turbines
has dropped dramatically. Currently, between 6 and 7% of the world's electricity
comes from wind turbines. Thus, the energy sector's greenhouse gas emissions are
already being reduced by this renewable source of electricity generation. Wind
Power as a Tool for Climate Mitigation and Sustainable Development The Wind and
Solar Power technologies are the main sources of generating energy under the NZE
2050 Scenario; however, due to the Net Zero pathway, accelerating the increase
of wind capacity yearly until 2030 is vital. Wind and solar PV experienced
record generation growth to achieve a combined 12% share in the global
electricity mix in 2022. Wind power had the second-highest growth rate with a
17% increase in generation. Far more extensive regulatory and private sector
efforts are required; the most crucial areas for improvement are the
facilitation of onshore wind permits and the decrease of offshore wind costs.
Emissions Reductions: Wind energy releases no greenhouse gases and its ratio of
energy gain to the energy invested is very good. The life cycle of wind turbines
is 6 g of CO2 per kWh of electricity being produced compared to the total
lifetime of emissions. This is due to the carbon dioxide which is released
during the output of electricity by the turbine where the quantity of
electricity it will produce is divided by the amount of electricity generated.
Burning extra coal, oil, or gas for every kWh of energy produced by the building
and deconstructing the plant, represent an additional cost of fossil fuel
generation. This comes out to about 900 g per kWh for coal. The US 2013 wind
energy output was 167.7 million mega-watt-hours (MWh) and the CO2 emissions
reduction was 126.8-million-ton. This is equivalent to removing 20 million cars
from the road or cutting emissions from the power sector by more than 5%. Job
Creation: Wind energy has producing a many jobs, not solely for researchers and
designers, but also for workers for new wind energy farms and developing new
wind energy technology. Wind power employment was steady at around 1.4 million
jobs in 2022, with most of the positions in China and Europe. Longevity: A wind
turbine runs practically emissions-free for 20 years. Within 3 to 6 months of
operation, a wind turbine has offset all emissions from its construction, to run
virtually carbon-free for the remainder of its 20-year life span. Cost-
effectiveness: Land-based, utility-scale wind turbines are one of the least
expensive energy sources accessible today. Furthermore, as wind energy research
and technology evolve, its cost competitiveness improves. As seen in the figure
below, Solar PV and wind power have lower levelized electricity costs than
fossil-based generation. In most cases, generating, buying, and selling
renewable electricity offers a better value proposition than relying on utility
companies to provide electricity sourced from fossil fuels. Figure XX: Levelized
Cost of Renewable Electricity, by Source, 2010 and 2021 >A graph of energy costs
Description automatically generated< Applications of Wind Power Utility-Scale
Wind Power: Utility-scale turbines are usually those that have multiple turbines
and are at least 100 KW and greater in power output. Power plants or power
operators on the other hand are the generators of electric power. They supply
electricity to the power grid and distribute the same to the end users. These
big wind turbine installations are strategically positioned in areas with ideal
wind conditions, which are often remote or offshore. Off-shore Wind Power:
Offshore wind power is drawn from the wind energy formed on the open seas,
because the wind speed is more intense and consistent in the open ocean than on
the land since there is no obstruction. The off-grid wind power also connects to
the electricity grid as needed. The wind power in 2022 consisted mostly of
onshore power plants connecting to the grid, while offshore wind farms accounted
for a relatively low percentage of the installed wind capacity at 7%. Onshore
wind is the leading choice in 115 countries, however, offshore wind is in the
untested stages of development and can be found in only 15 countries.
Distributed Wind: This refers to wind turbines under 100 kilowatts which are
used to directly power residential, commercial, agricultural, industrial or even
community sites. These are not connected to the grid. Challenges to Wind Power
Implementation Volatile Energy Markets: For the wind market, issues related to
supply chain delays and rising demand, as well as higher raw material costs,
shipping costs, interest rates, and inflation have led to projects not being
delivered in time or in some cases being shelved. Cost for Lower-Income
Countries: Capital costs for wind energy in less-developed countries are still
higher compared to that than in developed countries. This makes it much more
challenging to finance Onshore Wind energy projects. (See “Weighted Average Cost
of Capital for Onshore Wind Power and Solar PV, by Country Income Level, 2022”)
Case Study: Overcoming Challenges to UNDP-GEF Project ‘Kazakhstan — Wind Power
Market Development Initiative Background The United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) launched this project to establish a sustainable and
environmentally friendly wind energy industry in Kazakhstan. The initiative
revealed some challenges as well as opportunities that proved valuable.
Challenges Identified Awareness, Information, and Capacity Barriers: Barriers
that arose initially included, insufficient technical expertise, a lack of
awareness about wind energy opportunities, and the absence of operating wind
farms in the country. Financial Barriers: Kazakhstan faced a lack of financial
support schemes, high commercial risks for local companies and also difficulties
in attracting foreign investment. Institutional Barriers: The lack of a clear
national policy, specific legislation, regulation, and a central department
dedicated to wind energy hindered progress for the project Project Achievements:
Over the project's lifespan, it effectively addressed and alleviated many of
these challenges. This was particularly seen in the financial, technical, and
institutional realms. Notably, the project generated momentum for policy
adjustments and improved the regulatory environment. Key Learnings: Holistic
Approach: A holistic approach was needed to remove challenges. They needed to
focused on reducing commercial risks to stimulate investment. Policy Certainty:
Attracting developers and investors was necessary, however, it required long-
term policy and legal certainty. Realistic targets and efficient permitting
processes are essential for the project’s success. Recommendations Financial
Support: Implementing a long-term feed-in-tariff system should be offered to
developers to support wind farm development. Policy Stability: Enforcing stable
legislation and regulations will enhance commercial certainty for investors and
developers. Clear Targets: Setting realistic targets in the National Wind Energy
Programme and ensuring political support for their enforcement. Conclusion
Significant progress had been made in overcoming the challenges found, however
challenges still remain. Continued collaboration between governmental agencies,
international organizations, and industry stakeholders is crucial for sustaining
growth and ensuring the realization of wind energy’s potential. Hydropower
Hydropower’s role and use Hydropower energy a major source of renewable energy.
It uses the energy of water that moves from higher to lower elevations.
Hydropower can be divided into a few forms, large or small centralized grids.
These offer power to the grid and give important backup power or major power
outages/disruptions. These methods typically depend on steady rainfall patterns
and can be influenced by climate-induced droughts or changes in ecosystems that
affect rainfall patterns. Hydropower as a Tool for Climate Mitigation Hydropower
offers significant potential for carbon emissions reductions. When compared to
burning coal, hydropower saves up to four billion tonnes of additional
greenhouse gas emissions each year. Hydropower prevents the emission of about 3
GT CO2 per year, which represents about 9% of global annual CO2 emissions. In
the Net Zero Emissions by 2050 scenario, hydropower continues an average annual
generation growth rate of around 4% in 2023-2030. Research shows that we have
not reached the full potential of Hydropower. The total worldwide technical
potential for hydropower is estimated at 14,576 TWh/ yr (52.47 EJ/yr), over four
times the current worldwide annual generation. The percentages of undeveloped
potential, as seen in the figure below, range from 47% in Europe and North
America to 92% in Africa, indicating large opportunities for hydropower
development worldwide. Figurexx: Regional hydropower technical potential in
terms of annual generation and installed capacity, and percentage of undeveloped
technical potential in 2009. >A map of the world with different colored graphs
Description automatically generated< After almost a century of hydropower
development, North America and Europe still have the technical potential to
quadruple their generation. Africa has enormous technical potential and may
increase hydropower generation in the continent by 11 times what it already
does. Hydropower can allow for a rapid rise of solar and wind power. It provides
flexibility and storage to power systems. Applications of Hydropower Run-of-
river: This is a facility that directs flowing water from a river through a
canal or penstock to spin a turbine. A run-of-river project often has little or
no storage facilities. Run-of-river provides a continuous supply of energy (base
load), with some flexibility to accommodate daily swings in demand via water
flow that the facility regulates. Reservoir (storage hydropower): These are
often large systems with dams that store water in reservoirs. Electricity is
generated by discharging water from the reservoir via a turbine, which operates
a generator. Storage hydropower provides base load as well as the ability to
shut down and restart at short notice based on system demands (peak load). It
has considerable storage capacity to operate independently of hydrological
inflow for weeks or even months. Pumped storage: This method harnesses water by
cycling it between reservoirs using pumps. When energy is needed, water is
released using turbines that generate electricity. (Discussed in Chapter Three)
Challenges to Hydropower Implementation The local social and environmental
impacts of hydropower projects vary depending on certain project factors such as
type, size, and local conditions. Some of the more prominent impacts are changes
in flow regimes and water quality, barriers to fish migration, loss of
biological diversity, and population displacement. Hydropower also has
impairments on the ecology and society. Deforestation is one of the negative
effects that are usually the cause of large-scale operations. It can have
negative effects on marine life, or the displacement of ethnic groups. From 2014
to 2017, residents of Brazil experienced a devastating drought which depleted
the water level in hydroelectric plants operated by the country's power
companies, leading to higher utility bills. Case Study: Bio-Fuels in South-East
Asia While non-renewable energy systems generally have greater environmental
risks than renewable energy systems, renewable energy can also have
environmental effects that need to be considered. These include biodiversity
loss (e.g., through extensive areas of monocropping of energy crops and large-
scale solar panel installations), unsustainable mining of minerals required for
manufacturing (e.g., solar, wind, and batteries), a lack of effective end-of-
life recycling/recovery of manufactured articles, and unsustainable biomass
harvest management. The growth of palm oil and coconut plantations has led to
the degradation of tropical forests in South-East Asia. Lowland forests in
Malaysia and Indonesia have already suffered significant losses, including 80%
of Orangutan habitat. Palm oil companies had expanded into Papua New Guinea,
driven by the global need for biofuels. New Britain, an island off the east
coast of Papua New Guinea, has the highest rate of logging in Southeast Asia,
with 1.1% of its woods logged annually, compared to 0.8-0.9% in the region as a
whole. Between 1989 and 2000, 12% of forest was removed, including 20% of
lowland forests (under 100m altitude). If current rates of deforestation
continue, all forest below 200m will be removed by 2060. Biofuel production's
'displacement' impacts are a major issue, destroying rainforests, peatlands,
biodiversity, and of globally important carbon stores. A thorough assessment of
the land impacts of various energy technologies must take into account all
significant impacts, if any, on a life-cycle basis, including fuel extraction
and processing, transformation, and decommissioning. Such an assessment uses
land intensity metrics, which include an examination of how much land is
required, for how long, and whether it can be restored after use. Geothermal
energy The Geothermal Energy’s role and use? Geothermal energy uses the earth's
internal heat to produce power. It is a clean energy source which can be used in
residential, industrial and commercial settings. It is a a reliable and stable
source of energy because the heat perpetually generated by the interior of the
Earth. It is also a resource that is clean and safe as well as leaving little or
no traces of toxins or greenhouse gases. Many countries throughout the world
rely heavily on geothermal energy as a renewable energy source. In 2019,
geothermal power plants generated approximately 16.6 gigawatts (GW) of
electricity worldwide, accounting for 0.3% of total electricity generation. As a
renewable resource, geothermal covers a significant share of electricity demand
in countries such as Iceland, El Salvador, New Zealand, Kenya and the
Philippines, and meets more than 90% of the heating demand in Iceland.
Geothermal Energy as a Tool for Climate Mitigation and Sustainable Development
Geothermal Energy provides base-load power and heating (or cooling) from a vast
energy resource widely scattered worldwide. It has an excellent track record of
sustainable production utilizing current technology that is relevant to both
developed and emerging countries, and it generates cost-effective and highly
dispatchable power, especially as they are not dependent on climate conditions
and climate change. Additionally, Geothermal power produces lower greenhouse gas
emissions, primarily in the form of CO2, compared to standard base-load thermal
energy generation. In off-peak periods this base-load generation can also be
used to recharge battery-powered vehicles, helping to mitigate CO2 emissions
from fossil-fueled transportation. Moreover, Geothermal energy can help reduce
the massive post-harvest losses that many less-developed nations are
experiencing and serve as a primary heat source for greenhouses, soils, and
water used in fish farming. Heat energy can be used in processing to improve
food security by extending the shelf life of nutritious goods and making them
available all year, particularly during droughts. Applications of Geothermal
Energy Different types of geothermal energy require different technologies
depending on their depth, temperature, and final energy form. Electricity
Generation: Dry steam power plants use steam resources found underground. Steam
is pumped straight from subterranean wells to the power plant, where it is
routed through a turbine/generator unit. The most prevalent type of power plant
is flash steam, which uses geothermal reservoirs of water with temperatures
above 360°F (182°C). This extremely hot water rises via wells in the ground
under its own pressure. As it goes upward, the pressure drops, and some of the
hot water boils into steam. The steam is then extracted from the water and used
to drive a turbine or generator. Any remaining water and condensed steam are
injected back into the reservoir. Binary cycle power plants use water at
temperatures ranging from 225 to 360°F (107 to 182°C). Binary cycle plants
employ the heat from hot water to boil a working fluid, which is often an
organic molecule with a low boiling point. A heat exchanger converts the working
fluid into vapor, which is then used to turn a turbine. The water is then
injected back into the ground and warmed. The water and working fluid are
maintained separately throughout the operation, resulting in minimal or no air
emissions. Geothermal Heat Pumps: Ground-source heat pumps use the Earth's
relatively consistent temperature immediately beneath the surface to heat and
cool homes and businesses. District Heating: A centralized geothermal facility
delivers hot water or steam through a network of pipes to heat homes and
businesses. Industrial Processes: Geothermal energy is an invaluable resource
for industrial needs like food dehydration, milk pasteurization and other forms
of heat dependent production systems. In agriculture, it can be highly useful.
Greenhouses employ geothermal energy in heating the soil where crops are grown
thus increasing crop yield. For desalination, geothermal energy is used to
desalinate seawater by heating it up until water vapor comes out of the seawater
which then condenses to form fresh water Challenges to Geothermal Energy
Implementation Global Coordination and Classifications: There is a lack of
worldwide standards and guidelines. This hinders progress and accurate
assessments of how geothermal energy is operating and performing. This leads to
ambiguity in reporting and a limited understanding of what needs to be done
differently. Cost and technology: High-grade geothermal resources have
restricted geographic distribution. There are cost and technological hurdles to
using low-grade geothermal resources and EGS. In “Figure: Levelized Cost of
Renewable Electricity, by Source, 2010 and 2021”, the levelized cost of
geothermal energy has increased 36% from 2010-2021, more than any other energy
source examined in that research. High-quality geothermal resources are already
economically competitive with market energy costs in many areas. Public and
private research funding and favorable deployment rules may be required to
develop and commercialize lower-grade hydrothermal deposits. The effectiveness
of these efforts may play an important role in determining the magnitude of
geothermal energy's contributions to long-term GHG emissions reductions. Carbon
capture and storage What is Carbon capture and storage’s role and use? Carbon
capture and storage (CCS) involves the capturing of CO2 emissions from various
industrial processes. Examples of this can be steel, cement, or from the burning
of fossil fuels. The CO2 that is captured is then transported to storage. There
are over 500 projects in various stages of development across the Carbon Capture
Utilization and Storage value chain. This includes the Red Trail Energy Project
in the United States, the Arcelor LanzaTech Carbalyst project in Belgium, the
Global thermostat DAC pilot in the US, and four projects in China. Carbon
capture and storage (CCS) as a Tool for Climate Mitigation and Sustainable
Development CCS has some prospects available for mitigating climate change and
advancing towards a more sustainable future. CCS Technology can tackle emissions
in hard-to-abate sectors, particularly heavy industries like cement, steel or
chemicals. It is also considered an enabler of hydrogen production. There are
only 30 commercial CCS projects globally, capturing a total of around 42.5
MtCO2/year. CCS can also create new jobs due to the need to construct and
operate the new large facilities. Applications of Carbon Capture and Storage
(CCS) technology: CCS has diverse applications across several industries and
sectors. Here are some key areas where CCS is applied: Industrial Applications:
CCS can offer emissions reductions for industrial activities. This can be for
natural gas processing, food and drink, pulp and paper, refining, chemicals,
cement, iron and steel, non-ferrous metals, and biofuels. The IEA estimates that
the greenhouse gas emissions from these sectors alone currently represent about
22 percent of total global CO2 emissions.. Power sector: CCS technology can be
important for near-decarbonization of fossil-fuel-based power generation. This
is especially the case for oil and gas. With this sector holding most of the
responsibility for global carbon emissions, CCS can be applied here to aid the
transition. What are the Challenges to Carbon capture and storage
Implementation? Cost-effectiveness: The costs in CCS have been slow to fall.
Technology design is complex, and innovation is slow. It also tends to be highly
customized to the specific country. Because of its high costs, it relies heavily
on government subsidies to be economically viable. As shown in the figure below,
CCS has high costs compared to other energy sources. Cost and potential efficacy
of emissions reductions by CCS, methane (CH4) reduction, and renewable energies
>A graph of energy consumption Description automatically generated< Slow
Development: Over the last few decades, CCS has seen slow development. There are
only 30 commercial CCS projects globally, capturing a total of around 42.5
MtCO2/year, or less than 0.2% of the necessary emissions reduction needed to
close the emissions gap by 2030. It has been found that a majority of the 149
CCS projects that were projected to be storing carbon by 2020 globally have been
either canceled or put on indefinite hold because of incredibly high costs and
technological challenges. This slow development may not meet the speed required
to meet 2030 climate goals. Hydrogen What is Hydrogen’s role and use? Hydrogen
is a versatile energy carrier. Clean hydrogen produced with renewables can help
many sectors including long-haul transport, chemicals, and iron and steel, where
it has been proven hard to reduce emissions. Blue Hydrogen is produced using
natural gas using 2 primary methods. The first is steam methane reformation. It
is the most common methods for producing bulk. It uses a reformer that reacts
steam at high temperature and pressure with methane and nickel. It catalyzes to
form hydrogen. The second is autothermal reforming. This uses oxygen and CO2 or
steam to react with methane which forms hydrogen. However, green hydrogen is
produced by using electricity to power an ‘electrolyzer’. This splits the
hydrogen from water molecules and creates pure hydrogen with no harmful by-
products. Hydrogen as a Tool for Climate Mitigation and Sustainable Development
Hydrogen plays a fundamental role in mitigating sectors that have proven hard to
abate. Global hydrogen demand grew 3% in 2022 to 95 million tones. There are
mainly heavy industry, shipping, long-distance land transport, and aviation.
Implementing Hydrogen provides relatively low technical challenges, as it can be
a like-for-like substitution for others. More than 393 agreements were made
related to hydrogen in 2022. The realization of all of the projects in the
hydrogen pipeline could lead to an installed ‘electrolyzer’ capacity of 134-240
GW by 2030, with the lower end of the range similar to the total installed
renewable capacity in Germany and the upper end similar to the capacity in all
of Latin America. The potential for Hydrogen as a tool for climate mitigation
has increased after to ongoing discovery of white hydrogen, or hydrogen that can
be found naturally and has the capacity to replenish. Applications of Hydrogen
Transportation: In transport, where conventional fuels are typically used,
hydrogen has potential. Hydrogen fuel cells for buses, cars, trucks, maritime
and avation etc. Emitting only water vapor as a by-product presents a zero-
emission alternative. It also aids in air-quality improvements. It improves the
efficiency, durability, and affordability of fuel cells. Industry: Through
processes known as hydrogen direct reduction, steel manufacturers can replace
commonly used carbon-intensive modes. This significantly reduces carbon
emissions. Tailoring these applications to specific needs requires innovative
approaches such as optimized combustion technologies. What are the Challenges to
Hydrogen Implementation? High costs: Hydrogen production and its value chain can
pose issues with regards to cost. Hydrogen pipelines can be 10-50% more
expensive than fossil references. With long-term average fossil fuel prices of
USD 75/bbl for oil and USD 4-6/GJ for natural gas, renewable hydrogen is two to
three times more expensive to produce than the fossil alternative. Regarding
transport, fuel cells and storage tanks are multiple times more expensive than
the commonly used internal combustion engines. Lack of International Standards:
The global green hydrogen market has considerable challenges due to a lack of
international standards and regulations. Currently, there are no globally
acknowledged standards for hydrogen generation and use, prompting countries to
develop their own legislation. The lack of universal standards impedes wider
adoption of hydrogen and hinders its adoption into the global energy landscape.
Establishing a consistent worldwide framework is critical for preventing unfair
competition and accelerating the transition to a global green hydrogen economy.
Lack of Cross-Border Cooperation: The key challenges for transport and storage
are infrastructure development and cross-border cooperation. Nowadays, hydrogen
is typically produced and consumed on-site at minimal costs. To establish a
global hydrogen market, significant infrastructure expenditures are needed,
including pipelines and distribution networks. Successfully handling value
chains requires efficient and cost-effective technology for storing and
transporting hydrogen. Diplomatic relations between importer and exporter
countries will determine the future hydrogen economy, as imported hydrogen is
often cheaper than domestic production in certain places. Building large
infrastructures requires international cooperation and public-private
partnerships. Building confidence between governments in the growing industry is
crucial for future investments. The Role of UNDP in Supporting Climate
Mitigation and Energy Nexus The UNDP is committed to aiding countries in their
efforts to mitigate climate change by encouraging sustainable, low-carbon, and
climate-resilient development. The UNDP supports various areas, including
legislation development, capacity building, and financial mobilization, in
accordance with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), particularly SDGs 7,
11, and 13. The UNDP now oversees 94 climate change mitigation projects in 69
countries, funded by the Global Environment Facility and the Green Climate Fund.
These initiatives seek not just to cut greenhouse gas emissions, but also to
promote sustainable and resilient development. UNDP’s climate change mitigation
and energy nexus work falls under 3 pillars: Climate Promise: Supporting the
work of over 120 countries and territories, UNDP ensures that any country
wishing to increase the ambition of their national climate pledge can do so.
UNDP is expanding its assistance to countries in translating their NDC targets
into concrete action, while also advocating for increased ambition. By using
NDCs as a central framework, a wide-ranging infrastructure, networks, and array
of services UNDP offers comprehensive support for NDC implementation. This
endeavor is reinforced by robust backing for environmentally friendly efforts
and aligning UNDP's broader project portfolio with the goals of the Paris
Agreement and NDCs. Energy transition: UNDP works with countries to promote
energy for development, and build the resilient, equitable, sustainable energy
systems of tomorrow through just energy transitions. UNDP works with developing
countries to achieve a net-zero energy transition, in a manner that leaves no
one behind. Innovation and new business models are used at UNDP to modernize the
country’s energy infrastructure. This is complemented by financial mechanisms
and strategies to mitigate policy risks, directing public and private climate
finance. These are applied to areas where they can have the most effective
impact and provide a forum for discussions and guidance. Technology, innovation,
finance, and economics are crucial in the energy transition journey; however,
UNDP also adopts an inclusive and community-oriented strategy, prioritizing the
following interconnected areas: governance, social protection, and gender
equality. Carbon finance for development: UNDP aims to promote ambitious climate
action with a focus on energy-based mitigation approaches by supporting
developing countries to implement their climate plans to achieve ambitious
mitigation goals. This pillar enables countries and UNDP partners to leverage
carbon markets for private climate investments. This has advanced global
development and climate objectives. It’s essential to find innovative, effective
and context-sensitive ways to stimulate and increase investment and finance for
NDCs and national development plans. This is because public funds won’t be
enough to finance developing countries’ climate plans, even though they are
critical. Article 6 of the Paris Agreement details a set of tools and
mechanisms, such as cooperative approaches and the transfer of Internationally
Transferrable Mitigation Outcomes, which can stimulate investments in mitigation
efforts and NDC implementation. Chapter 3: Leveraging Sustainable Energy for
Climate Adaptation Chapter Three: Leveraging Sustainable Energy for Climate
Adaptation Climate change introduces new challenges and uncertainties that
require energy systems to be more flexible, robust, and prepared to withstand
extreme weather events, temperature variations, and changing environmental
conditions. Therefore, enhancing the resilience and adaptability of energy
systems to climate change shocks is crucial for ensuring the reliability,
sustainability, and security of energy supply in the face of increasing climate-
related risks. In the meantime, sustainable energy solutions not only reduce
greenhouse gas emissions but used a tool for climate adaptation and build
resilience, support economic development, and improve energy access and
affordability of sustainable energy systems. Leveraging sustainable energy for
climate adaptation involves using renewable energy sources, energy efficiency
measures, and resilient energy infrastructure to enhance communities' ability to
adapt to the impacts of climate change. Strategies to enhancing resilience and
adaptability of energy systems toward climate change shock. Vulnerability
Assessment Risk Mapping Risk mapping of energy infrastructure in the face of
climate change is a crucial global initiative that involves identifying and
evaluating the vulnerabilities that different regions and systems may face due
to varying climate impacts. This geographical and component-specific analysis
helps in understanding the direct threats to infrastructure such as power
plants, transmission lines, and renewable energy facilities from extreme weather
events like hurricanes, floods, and heatwaves. Globally, different regions
exhibit unique vulnerabilities based on their geographical and climatic
conditions. For instance, in Europe, the increased risk of flooding threatens to
disrupt power generation and distribution networks, while in Asia, particularly
in Southeast Asia and the Himalayan region, the risk includes typhoons and the
impact of melting glaciers on hydropower facilities. Similarly, in Africa,
drought conditions pose a significant threat to hydroelectric power sources,
which are crucial for the region's energy supply. The process of risk mapping
involves collecting extensive meteorological and environmental data to project
the frequency and intensity of expected climate impacts. This data is then
analyzed in the context of the existing energy infrastructure to assess
potential vulnerabilities. The findings guide the development of adaptation and
mitigation strategies tailored to protect critical energy assets and ensure
their resilience. Effective risk mapping not only identifies current risks but
also uses predictive modeling to anticipate future challenges. This forward-
looking approach is essential for planning infrastructure developments and
retrofitting existing facilities to withstand anticipated climatic changes. It
also informs policy-making, helping governments and organizations prioritize
investments in energy resilience to safeguard against future climate-related
disruptions. Physical and operational vulnerabilities within current energy
systems After assessing the external risks to the energy infrastructures, it is
imperative to analyze the potential weaknesses in both the physical components
of the energy infrastructure and the operational processes that manage the flow
and distribution of energy.Physical vulnerabilities often pertain to the
susceptibility of infrastructure like power plants, transmission lines, and
substations to extreme weather events such as floods, storms, or heatwaves.
These events can cause direct damage to facilities, disrupt service, and lead to
long-term outages. Evaluating these risks involves assessing the current state
of infrastructure, its location, design parameters, and the materials from which
it is built. Adaptation measures could include retrofitting facilities with more
durable materials, relocating critical components to less vulnerable areas, or
constructing protective barriers. Operational vulnerabilities consider the
capacity of energy systems to manage and adapt to changing conditions without
significant interruptions in service. This aspect takes into account the
flexibility of the grid, the availability of alternative energy sources, and the
ability to quickly repair and restore service after an event. Evaluating
operational vulnerabilities involves analyzing how well the energy system can
withstand fluctuations in supply and demand, particularly those that may be
exacerbated by climate change, such as increased demand for cooling during
heatwaves or the variability of renewable energy sources. It's also important to
consider that the impacts of climate change on energy systems can be amplified
by systemic factors such as energy system interdependencies, water scarcity, and
increased electricity demand. These broader considerations play into
vulnerability evaluations as they affect the overall robustness and reliability
of the energy supply chain. Infrastructure Resilience Strengthening physical
infrastructure against extreme weather and climate conditions is a proactive
approach to enhancing the resilience of critical energy assets. This task
involves several strategies such as reinforcing structural designs, using
resilient construction materials, and implementing advanced architectural
techniques that take into account the increased intensity and frequency of
climate-related events. The reinforcement of infrastructure is not only about
making physical improvements to withstand severe conditions but also about
adapting to a changing environment where old standards may no longer suffice.
For example, utility companies might elevate electrical substations in flood-
prone areas or retrofit cooling systems in power plants to cope with higher
ambient temperatures. Furthermore, resilience can be built through the
diversification of energy sources. By incorporating a mix of renewable and
traditional energy sources, the energy grid can better withstand and recover
from disruptions. Implementing microgrids in vulnerable areas is another way to
ensure that local energy needs are met even when centralized infrastructure
fails. It is also crucial to consider the systemic factors such as supply chain
robustness, operational procedures during emergencies, and the integration of
renewable sources to manage fluctuations in energy generation and demand. Smart
Grid Implementation Implementing smart grid technology is central to enhancing
the responsiveness and stability of energy systems. Smart grids incorporate
advanced sensors, controls, and software to gather and act on information about
the behaviors of suppliers and consumers, in turn improving the efficiency,
reliability, security, and sustainability of the production and distribution of
electricity. Through real-time monitoring and automated control systems, smart
grids can detect and respond to local changes in usage or production, as well as
system-wide shifts, allowing for a more resilient response to demand
fluctuations and potential disruptions. For example, during extreme weather
events, a smart grid can reroute power automatically to maintain supply where
traditional grids might fail. Smart grids also facilitate the integration of
renewable energy sources, which can be variable and distributed in nature,
helping to stabilize the grid by managing unpredictable fluctuations in power
generation. Furthermore, they enhance consumer engagement by allowing end-users
to adjust their consumption based on real-time pricing and availability, leading
to energy and cost savings, and contributing to the overall demand management.
In addition to immediate operational benefits, smart grids also support long-
term planning and infrastructure development by providing detailed data that can
inform the deployment of resources and the upgrade of systems to handle
projected changes in climate and consumption patterns. Promotion of Distributed
Energy Resources (DERs) The promotion of Distributed Energy Resources (DERs) is
a forward-thinking strategy to enhance the flexibility of energy systems and
reduce reliance on centralized power generation. DERs include a variety of
smaller-scale technologies such as solar panels, wind turbines, energy storage
systems like batteries, and small natural gas-powered generators that can be
deployed at or near the point of use, such as residential, commercial, or
community settings. Encouraging the adoption of DERs can significantly increase
the resilience of the energy grid by enabling a rapid response to changes in
supply and demand, reducing transmission losses, and mitigating the impact of
outages. When parts of the grid are compromised due to extreme weather or other
disruptions, DERs can often continue to operate, providing reliable power
independently. Moreover, DERs can play a pivotal role in grid stabilization by
offering services such as voltage support, frequency regulation, and peak load
reduction, which are increasingly important as the penetration of intermittent
renewable energy sources grows. They also empower consumers to take charge of
their own energy consumption, potentially lowering costs and contributing to
environmental sustainability. Integrating DERs requires not only technology but
also regulatory frameworks, market mechanisms, and incentives that support their
adoption and operation. Effective integration into the existing grid
infrastructure is key, including the need for smart grid technologies that can
manage the two-way flow of electricity and information. Sustainable Energy
Solutions in Adaptation Strategies In the previous sections, we have discussed
how climate change interrupts energy resilience and the adaptation measures that
need to be addressed to cope with the risks of climate change. In this section,
we will learn how to leverage sustainable energy in climate adaptation
strategies. According to UNFCCC, climate adaptation refers to the changes in
processes, practices, and structures to cope with the potential damages or to
benefit from opportunities associated with climate change. It also means that
countries and communities need to develop adaptation solutions and implement
actions responding to the current and upcoming impacts of climate change. It is
important to note that there is no “one-size-fits'-all-solution" for climate
adaptation measures for different countries and regions. The recent IPCC Sixth
Assessment Report describes how the challenges to adapt to climate change will
be even harder to solve if the global temperature rise gets close to or exceeds
the 1.5oC threshold. It mentions how some adaptation measures will not be less
effective due to the projected deviations in the climate system. Below diagram
shows the cycle of adaptation process that includes (1) assessing the impacts,
vulnerabilities, and risks by raising awareness and ambition, (2) making plan
for adaptation through providing political space for engagement, (3)
implementing adaptation measures by sharing information, knowledge, and guidance
and strengthening technical and institutional capacity, and (4) monitoring and
evaluating adaptation measures by facilitating the provision of financial and
technological support. Figure X. Adaptation policy cycle and support offered
under the UN Climate Change regime Source: UNFCCC, 2022 Poor and vulnerable
countries are the ones that need the most support to adapt to the risks of
climate change. A study by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) describes that
countries who need to adapt the most to climate change often lack the capacity
to do so, especially regarding financing and institutional capacity to implement
the adaptation programs. As shown in the graph, most low-income countries have
greater climate-related risks, yet a lower adaptive capacity index. In contrast,
countries with advanced economies have lower exposure index yet higher capacity
to adapt to climate change. Figure X. Unequal costs of climate change Source:
IMF, 2022 >A graph of a graph showing the impact of economic growth on the
economy Description automatically generated with medium confidence< This is
where sustainable energy, energy storage, and microgrids play important roles in
helping countries adapt to climate-related risks, especially for the low-income
communities. However, implementing climate adaptation measures should not only
depend on the technological innovations and availability, but it is also
important to have robust engagement strategies with the related stakeholders,
which also include the communities. Microgrids and Renewable Energy in Enhancing
Community Resilience In this subsection, we will discuss the importance of
microgrid in facilitating local energy generation and distribution, the role of
community in enabling the success of microgrids, and its contribution to
achieving the SDGs. I)   How microgrids facilitate local energy generation and
distribution Microgrids and renewable energy are essential to enable a region’s
adaptation strategies towards climate change. For countries in risks of climate
change, communities are seeking solutions to enhance their resilience and
implementing microgrids in those regions could be a prominent solution. A
microgrid is a group of interconnected loads and distributed energy resources
acting as a single controllable entity with respect to the grid. It is
applicable for remote regions due to its ability to connect and disconnect from
the grid and operate in grid-connected or island mode. With microgrids,
customers become more resilience to grid disturbance. Furthermore, with the
advanced version of microgrids, communities can leverage their local power
generation assets, such as generators, solar panels, and batteries. In some
cases, the presence of advanced microgrids helps communities save money, have
power for a longer period, and increase income by selling excess energy back to
the main grid. This localized approach fosters stability and predictability in
the face of disruptions on the main grid. Case Study: Solar Microgrid Solar
microgrid harnesses the power of solar energy to generate electricity
domestically. Therefore, it reduces the reliance on centralized power plants and
transmissions lines, resulting in a more resilient energy supply which is less
affected by the disruption caused by extreme weather conditions. Solar microgrid
also offers scalability and flexibility that allow communities to expand their
energy generation capacity gradually as needed. With the decentralization
approach, this allows energy distribution to not be interrupted by the outage in
other grids. Success Stories: Adjuntas, Puerto Rico Community-owned solar-
powered microgrids kept the power on for nine days when other parts of the
island went dark during Hurrican Fiona. Previously, the region did not have
power for six months because of Hurricane Maria in 2017. With the installed
microgrids by a local community organization (Casa Pueblo) partnered with the
nonprofit Honnold Foundation, the number of days without electricity had been
significantly reduced, therefore, increasing community resilience by adapting to
the risks of climate change. II)  The role of community engagement and
governance in microgrid projects Microgrids can empower communities by allowing
a better quality of life with improved access to healthcare and education. For
example, in rural region where access to energy is limited yet the region is
heavily impacted by climate change, proper energy supply to healthcare and other
critical facilities is imperative to ensure the emergency readiness during
extreme weather conditions that might impact human health. Success microgrid
projects require robust community engagement and governance structure to cater
to the specific needs of the population it serves. Community involvement is
critical due to the following reasons: 1)  Identifying specific energy needs and
prioritizing functionalities during outages, ensuring the most critical services
and facilities in the region are catered 2)      Exploring various ownership
models, such as public-private partnerships, to foster a sense of ownership to
the residents to invest in the microgrid project 3)  Ensuring the project’s
sustainability due to the active community participation to ensure that the
microgrid is maintained well Improving microgrids operational performance
requires community engagement and governance. The operational governance
includes a robust decision-making framework involving all stakeholders’ voices,
guidelines for the day-to-day operations & maintenance, and revenue-sharing
mechanisms for the income generated by selling the excess electricity. 1)
Decision-making framework: Developing decision-making criteria and tools to help
guide microgrid operators and stakeholders in assessing different options and
making informed decisions. The criteria should include technical, economic,
social, environmental, and regulatory aspects of microgrid applications in the
region. 2)    Operations and maintenance guidelines: Having the operations and
maintenance guidelines is helpful to ensure the functionality of the microgrid
over the lifespan. The guidelines can include asset inventory, scheduled
maintenance procedure, emergency response & troubleshooting, etc. 3)   Revenue-
sharing mechanisms: The revenue-sharing mechanisms for a microgrid project
should involve distributing the generated income from its operations to the
stakeholders involved in the development, ownership, and management. Several
measures that can help to build the mechanisms include identifying relevant
stakeholders, revenue sources & allocation, investor returns, risk management,
etc. Integration of microgrids and renewable energy in supporting SDGs SDG #7
Affordable and Clean Energy: Microgrids that are powered by renewable energy
sources provide reliable and affordable electricity to remote and underserved
communities. SDG #8 Decent Work and Economic Growth: The construction of energy
infrastructures induces job creation in the region, specifically for the
installation, maintenance and operation purposes. Therefore, this kind of
initiative supports economic growth and promotes livelihood of the surrounding
communities. SDG #9 Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure: The presence of
microgrid combined with renewable energy would promote innovations and foster
the adoption of advanced technologies such as smart grids and energy storage
systems. SDG #11 Sustainable Cities and Communities: Microgrid combined with
renewable energy enhance energy resilience of the communities by improving
energy distributions. It also reduces greenhouse gas emissions from shifting
away from fossil fuels, resulting in sustainable communities. SDG #13 Climate
Action: Integrating microgrids with renewable energy supports climate action
strategies. For climate adaptation measures, it provides decentralized and more
reliable energy solutions that are less vulnerable to any disruptions caused by
climate change. SDG #17 Partnership for the goals: Implementing the integration
of microgrid and renewable energy requires robust collaboration between
government, private sector, NGOs, and communities. The partnerships include
knowledge sharing, technology transfer, and financial support. These all support
the aim to strengthen global partnership for sustainable development. 3.2.3.
Energy Storage Technologies for Energy Security 1. Overview of energy security
1)  Overview of energy storage solutions Energy storage solutions are showing a
growing trend throughout the years. The global energy storage systems market is
projected to grow at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 11.6% from 2023 to
2030 to reach 512.41 GW. Furthermore, throughout the years, we have been seeing
a relatively declining cost of energy storage systems, due to the lower cost of
goods sold, economies of scale, technological advancement, learning curve, and
policy support and incentives to further develop this technology. For instance,
lithium-ion battery cells’ prices have fallen by around 97% since 1991. As
mentioned in the introduction section that one of the problems faced by low-
income countries in adapting to climate change is the lack of financing, the
decreasing trends of the cost of battery shows an opportunity for those
countries to gradually adapt energy storage in their regions. Energy storage
stores and discharges it when the demand is peak. It helps maintain grid
stability and reliability, especially when connected to renewable energy
sources. Therefore, helping regions adapt to climate change. Opportunities: The
integration of renewable energy sources with energy storage systems enhances
efficiency, reliability, and effectiveness. These systems store excess energy
during high generation and release it during low generation, reducing backup
power requirements and optimizing power management based on demand fluctuations.
1)       Matching Supply and Demand: Energy storage systems balance renewable
energy supply and demand by storing excess energy during high generation and
releasing it during low generation or high demand, ensuring a reliable and
consistent supply of renewable energy. 2)  Grid Stability and Resilience: Energy
storage systems maintain grid stability and resilience by quickly responding to
sudden changes in demand or renewable energy generation. They regulate voltage
and frequency levels, preventing blackouts and enhancing the grid's ability to
handle renewable energy variability. Furthermore, it is imperative for emergency
preparedness due to its ability to provide backup power and stabilization of
energy services when disasters strike. 3)     Optimizing Energy Generation:
Storage systems optimize energy generation by storing excess energy during high
renewable generation and releasing it during low generation, maximizing
renewable energy utilization and minimizing wastage, thereby enhancing grid
efficiency and cost-effectiveness. 4) Microgrid and Off-grid Applications: The
integration of renewable energy storage with energy storage in microgrids and
off-grid systems, particularly in remote or rural areas, offers energy
resilience and access in areas with limited or no grid connectivity. Challenges:
While the coordinated use of renewable energy and energy storage offers
substantial benefits, several challenges hinder its seamless integration. Some
key issues are discussed here. 1) Technology and Cost: Technology and cost are
significant challenges in the seamless integration of renewable energy and
energy storage. The development and deployment of advanced technologies for both
renewable energy generation and energy storage systems can be costly, making it
difficult for widespread adoption. Additionally, the cost of integrating these
technologies into existing power grids and infrastructure can also be a barrier
to their seamless integration. 2)       Infrastructure and Grid Integration:
Energy storage system integration into grid infrastructure can be complex and
costly, requiring significant infrastructure investments like new transmission
lines and distribution networks. 3)   Regulatory and Policy Frameworks:
Inadequate or inconsistent regulatory frameworks can hinder the efficient
deployment of energy storage systems due to lack of standardized regulations,
unclear market structures, and grid access barriers. 4)       Lack of
Scalability and Flexibility: Another challenge for seamless integration of
energy storage systems is the lack of scalability and flexibility. Many existing
storage technologies have limited capacity and are not easily scalable to meet
increasing energy demands. Additionally, some storage systems may not be
flexible enough to adapt to changing grid conditions and varying energy needs.
5)   Environmental Impact: The production, deployment, and disposal of certain
energy storage technologies may have environmental implications. For instance,
the manufacturing processes for some battery chemicals involve materials that
raise environmental concerns, necessitating proper recycling and disposal
strategies. 6) Public Acceptance and Awareness: Public perception and acceptance
of energy storage technologies, especially in residential or community settings,
can influence their adoption. Lack of awareness, concerns about safety, and
aesthetic considerations may hinder community support for energy storage
projects. Addressing these challenges requires collaborative efforts among
policymakers, industry stakeholders, researchers, and the public. Developing
supportive policies, incentivizing technological innovation, investing in
research and development, and enhancing grid infrastructure are crucial steps
toward overcoming barriers to the coordinated use of renewable energy and energy
storage. 2. Batteries Batteries are pivotal in energy transition. They work by
converting electrical energy into chemical energy, allowing them to charge and
discharge the energy as required. That is why energy storage, such as batteries,
can be one of the drivers of a region’s energy security, supporting them to
adapt to climate change risks. Innovations in batteries to support climate
adaptation: Innovations in batteries help regions with extreme weather
conditions to adapt to climate change risks. For example, lithium-ion batteries
are mostly found in transportation and grid applications due to their higher
energy density and storage than the other types of batteries. Other than that,
recently, with the help of artificial intelligence and supercomputing,
researchers at Microsoft and the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PPNL)
have found a new battery component that can improve the use of lithium-ion
batteries. This new type of battery is said to perform better than the existing
ones by increasing the energy density, charging quicker, increasing product
safety, and reducing weight. With the higher energy density of solid-state
batteries, it can store energy for 10 to 100 hours of storage, while the
conventional lithium-ion batteries only have 4 to 6 hours of storage time.
Therefore, when deployed in extreme weather conditions, this new battery
technology can possibly have longer lifespan to help communities adapt to
climate risks. Case study: Success stories in Tanzania In a Tanzanian island in
Lake Victoria, the implementation of battery management systems meets a special
requirement of climate compatibility of the region, low cost of maintenance, and
other flexible configurations. This case study emphasizes a blueprint for the
electrification of a remote region by utilizing second-life lithium-ion traction
batteries for an integrated energy system in a stand-alone grid. As a result,
there is an improvement of the overall energy system efficiency and positive
socioeconomic and humanitarian impact to the local communities, supporting them
to adapt to climate change risks. 4) Pumped hydropower storage (PHS) PHS acts
similarly like a battery for its ability to store and discharge power when
needed. It uses two reservoirs with different elevations. When the demand of
energy is low, excess power is used to pump water up to the higher reservoir. On
the other hand, when the electricity demand is high, the water is released back
down to flow through turbines that generate clean power. >Diagram of a power
plant Description automatically generated< Figure X. Illustration of how PSH
works Source: de Assis Brasil Weber et al. 2024 Hydropower’s performance relies
on the change in climate system. Its generation depends directly on the
availability of water resources and, therefore, on the hydrological cycle.
Consequently, hydropower endowments are a result of the excess water
(precipitation minus evapotranspiration) that turns into runoff. The hydropower
endowment also depends on the seasonal pattern of the hydrological cycle. In
regions where snowmelt is a relevant factor in the annual water cycle, climate
change may cause impacts to hydropower endowments. This issue can be
particularly relevant in regions where the glaciers can be affected by higher
temperatures. Hydropower plants in those regions depend on the seasonal cycle of
snowmelt to regularize output throughout the year. For example, many glaciers in
the Andes, such as the Chacaltaya in Bolivia, have been severely reduced in
size. This can affect the regularization of hydropower production in those
regions, reducing their endowments, which is a function of the volume of water
available for power production. The amount of electricity that can be generated
from hydropower plants depends not only on the installed generation capacity,
but also on the variation in water inflows to the power plants’ reservoirs.
Natural climate variability already greatly influences the planning and
operations of hydropower systems. These systems are built based on historical
records of climatic patterns, which determine the amount and variability of
energy produced over daily or seasonal fluctuations. Changing climate conditions
may affect the operation of the existing hydropower system and even compromise
the viability of new entrepreneurships. In fact, global climate change can add a
significant amount of uncertainty to the already uncertain operation of
hydropower systems. Therefore, although pumped storage hydropower could be one
of the drivers for climate adaptation strategies, its performance is also highly
dependent on the risks of climate change. Success Story: Brazil’s seasonal
pumped hydropower storage (SPHS) Brazil is one of the countries that is most
likely to be affected by climate change. Its main energy resources are renewable
energy which are directly related to climate factors. The Brazilian power sector
implemented the seasonal pumped hydropower storage to balance the supply and
demand for electricity, especially during droughts that would impact the
hydroelectric power plants. With the new seasonal technology, the Brazilian
power sector is able to store energy for days, weeks, or months, to compensate
for a longer-term supply disruptions, such as the seasonal variability of the
energy supply and demand. The SPHS can do so by storing potential energy during
the wet season when the water flow in the river or energy availability in the
grid is excessive, by pumping water to the upper reservoir, as illustrated in
the figure X above. SPHS stores extra electricity and discharge it when needed
and it helps in adapting toward climate change. Firstly, it stores energy for
both short and long period, supporting the renewable energy grid to work all the
time. Moreover, it helps areas with tricky geography have more water and less
water loss. This renewable energy technology also results in less pollution due
to its nature as a clean energy, and also creates less carbon dioxide pollution
than other methods due to the smaller requirement for the reservoir. Therefore,
by utilizing this SPHS, Brazil cuts down its greenhouse gas emissions by
producing clean energy and becomes more resilient in adapting to climate change.
3.2.4 Integrating storage with renewable energy sources for grid stability and
reliability In the previous subsections, we have learnt how microgrids improve
communities’ resilience and how energy storage systems are critical in energy
transition initiatives. In this section, we will delve into the integration of
renewable energy with the storage systems to enable grid stability and
reliability. Ensuring grid stability and reliability, especially in regions with
high climate-related risks, is important to minimize the risks of grid
disturbance due to extreme weather conditions. Often, when renewable energy
sources are not connected to energy storage solutions, grid stability and
reliability might be impacted. The impacts on grid stability mainly comes: 1)
Frequency and voltage anomalies Wind and solar, for example, have a stochastic
nature that makes the frequency and voltage produced unreliable to some extent.
2)       Overloading of the existing transmission lines Because of the increased
loads during peak hours, the transmission line becomes overloaded because of the
mismatch of the inflow and outflow of power (or in other words, the demand and
supply of energy). Too much power flowing throughout the lines causes surge and
the entire system might shut down. Due to the unpredictable nature of energy
sources for solar and wind, without the use of battery, this challenge will be
critical to addressed. Therefore, to solve the challenges, it is important to
utilize energy storage solutions to help the communities adapt to climate-risks.
Below case studies show the success story and lessons learned from integrating
storage with renewable energy sources. --     Success Story: Hornsdale Power
Reserve in South Australia The Hornsdale Power Reserve in South Australia is a
prime example of a successful combination of renewable energy and energy
storage, developed by Tesla and the South Australian Government. The lithium-ion
battery system improves grid stability by responding to power supply
fluctuations and optimizing charging and discharging cycles. The project
showcases the cost-effectiveness of large-scale energy storage, enhancing
renewable energy sources and creating a more sustainable energy environment. It
also reduces reliance on fossil fuel-powered backup power facilities, setting a
standard for other regions to implement similar energy storage systems,
promoting a more environmentally friendly and robust energy system. --  Story of
Failure & Lessons Learned: The Sarnia Solar Project in Ontario The Sarnia Solar
Project in Ontario, Canada, faced challenges in integrating renewable energy and
energy storage to manage intermittent solar power generation. The project, which
aimed to contribute significantly to Ontario's renewable energy goals, faced
technical issues and cost overruns during the implementation phase of a 25 MW/50
MWh lithium-ion battery storage system. These issues led to setbacks in the
deployment and functionality of the energy storage component, impacting grid
stability and reliable solar power generation. The failure highlighted the
complexities and risks associated with integrating energy storage with renewable
sources. Opportunities for improvement include technological advancements,
research and development, improved grid compatibility, and learning from
failures. These setbacks provide valuable insights for future projects aiming to
combine renewables with effective energy storage solutions. Integrating Climate
Adaptation into Sustainable Energy Planning/Policies Countries have started to
integrate their climate adaptation strategies into their planning and
policymaking for sustainable energy, especially in their Nationally Determined
Contributions (NDCs). For example, Sudan includes hydro plant, especially in
combination with irrigation-sites, energy recovery by generation of electricity
or gas from waste, and introduction of agroforestry in areas vulnerable to
climate change to enhance agriculture production, in its NDC. Furthermore, Lao
DPR also included hydroelectric for having a great potential in providing clean
energy and meeting other objectives such as flood, irrigation, and water supply
management. From these two examples, we can see how renewables are not only
being recognized for its ability to reduce GHG emissions, but also to include
them in the country’s adaptation strategies. However, when climate adaptation
strategies do not work out, it might trigger negative responses (maladaptation)
that results in the raising of greenhouse-gas emissions and even more vulnerable
communities which both run counter to sustainable development principles.
Therefore, integrating climate adaptation into sustainable energy planning and
policies carefully is important to enhance system resilience, reduce
vulnerability, enable sustainable development, align with climate goals, and
improve cost-effectiveness of sustainable energy technologies. Steps to
integrate climate adaptation into sustainable energy planning and/or policies
include: 1)     Assessing the vulnerability of the energy sector to climate
change impacts, such as extreme weather events, sea-level rise, and changing
precipitation patterns. The assessment should be holistic that it includes
potential risks and impacts on energy infrastructure, supply chains, and energy
demand. 2)  Identifying and prioritizing adaptation measures that can enhance
the resilience of the energy sector to climate change impacts, which includes
several measures such as diversifying energy sources to reduce reliance on
vulnerable resources, improving the design and construction of energy
infrastructure to withstand extreme weather events, and implementing demand-side
management strategies which can reduce energy consumption during peak demand or
disruptions in supply. 3)     Incorporating climate adaptation considerations
into energy planning processes, such as the development of energy policies,
strategies, and plans, involving setting specific adaptation targets and
objectives, integrating climate risk assessments into decision-making processes,
and considering climate change scenarios in long-term energy planning. 4)
Prioritizing the development and deployment of renewable energy sources, such as
solar, wind, and hydropower, which are less vulnerable to climate change impacts
than fossil-fuels. 5) Fostering collaboration and partnerships between energy
sector stakeholders, government agencies, and other related stakeholders to
promote knowledge sharing, capacity building, and coordinated action towards
climate adaptation in the energy sector. Case Example: Why integrating water
resource development (for climate adaptation) with sustainable energy planning
is important Careful and advanced planning for water resource development is
important to minimize the possibility of maladaptation, which includes the
overexploitation of groundwater by solar irrigation when there is no proper
planning or a monitoring system and a lack of coordination with other
stakeholders/sectors and the emerging possibility of negative impacts on the
environment such as waste brine from solar-powered desalination process. Case
Example: Italy’s practices in integrating climate adaptation into sustainable
energy planning The study proposes a method to assess the alignment between
climate change adaptation objectives (CCAOs) and national strategic goals (NSGs)
in Italy's National Adaptation Plan to Climate Change (NAPCC) and National
Sustainable Development Strategy (NSDS). By analyzing these documents and
conducting stakeholder interviews, the study identifies areas of convergence and
divergence between CCAOs and NSGs. The research finds that objectives related to
urban settlements and forests in NAPCC are most consistent with NSDS goals,
while those concerning water resources and agriculture lack alignment. It
suggests that efforts should be made to develop CCAOs that support sustainable
development, especially in vital sectors like water and agriculture. The study
acknowledges limitations, including its focus on specific sectors and the need
for broader international application. Future research could explore additional
sectors and consider social and economic sustainability pillars, potentially
through stakeholder engagement processes like Living Labs. The Role of UNDP in
Supporting Climate Adaptation and Energy Nexus UNDP is currently assisting
governments under the Climate Promise to scale up and actualize their adaptation
ambitions. This supports UNDP’s involvement to 50 countries on National
Adaptation Plan (NAP) processes and to 140 countries on building a strong
portfolio of climate change adaptation interventions. UNDP’s climate change
adaptation works across seven thematic areas to support vulnerable communities
in building resilience to climate change: Mainstreaming adaptation: UNDP
provides policy and institutional assistance for climate change adaptation
planning and policy through the National Adaptation Plan (NAP) processes in
Developing and Least Developed Countries (LDCs). The NAPs are implemented in an
integrated approach connecting with Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs)
and aligning with UNDP’s Climate Promise. The NAPs are committed to accelerate
climate action and progress on SDGs by integrating climate risk across all
development levels – local, national, regional, and global. Livelihoods UNDP
supports the enhancement of climate-resilient livelihoods for vulnerable
communities, including resilient agriculture value chains (such as utilizing
renewable energy as the energy source for agricultural activities). The main
works include supporting entrepreneurs, development of public goods to build
market resilience, and promoting income diversification and improved
productivity. Ecosystem-based adaptation UNDP supports countries’ practices of
integrating conservation and targeted restoration of natural ecosystems and
degraded landscapes into strategies for ecosystem-based adaptation that provides
protection against climate change threats. Sustainable energy plays an important
role in protecting the ecosystems and biodiversity by reducing carbon emissions,
imposing smaller ecological footprint, and enhancing communities’ resilience by
providing reliable power sources for adaptation measures. Food security &
agriculture With improved access to climate information, new technologies, and
advanced land and water management techniques, vulnerable communities are
supported with the tools they need to adapt to climate-related risks. The
implementation of renewable energy for farming operations can provide farmers
with reliable and affordable sources of electricity, thus increasing food
security & agriculture. Coastal Adaptation UNDP advocates for a comprehensive
approach to managing the world’s rivers, lakes and oceans to become resilient to
climate change. The main works include enabling sustainable land management
practices, advancing integrated water resource management systems, and improving
catchment areas. The presence of sustainable energy for coastal communities
improves their resilience due to the availability of reliable power sources that
are less impacted by the climate change, such as decentralized renewable energy
solutions. Urban resilience: UNDP supports the urban resilience by improving the
entrepreneurs and micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs). The rising
trends of clean energy startups can help build the urban resilience in adapting
to climate change. Through UNDP Accelerator Labs, UNDP can boost innovations,
specifically those focusing on renewable energy technologies for urban
resilience. Climate information and early warning systems: UNDP’s work through
this service line is providing people with the information they need to thrive
and enhancing evidence-based decision-making. The main areas of work include
involving communities in product design, information sharing within countries,
development of climate information infrastructure, etc. Case example: UNDP
support on the installation of a 14 MW Grid-Scale Battery The 14 MW Grid-Scale
Battery Energy Storage System (BESS) was inaugurated in the Republic of
Mauritius, specifically at the Jin Fei substation, in Riche Terre, back in 2021.
UNDP granted USD 7.5 million to the project via a Green Climate Fund grant,
under the umbrella initiative of “Accelerating the transformational shift to a
low-carbon economy in the Republic of Mauritius” project. The system was
designed to stabilize the electrical grid frequency. Aligning with the
government’s climate agenda, it also helps to reduce fossil fuel consumption on
the national energy grid and could potentially reduce greenhouse gas emissions
by 40% by 2030. Through this project, the local communities are becoming more
resilient in adapting to climate change. 1 footnote1) footnote2)
https://theicct.org/sites/default/files/publications/ICCT_CO2-commercl-
aviation-2018_20190918.pdf footnote3) <a href="https://www.unep.org/news-and-
stories/press-release/co2-emissions-buildings-and-construction-hit-new-high-
leaving-sector">https://www.unep.org/news-and-stories/press-
release/co2-emissions-buildings-and-construction-hit-new-high-leaving-sector</a>
<a href="https://www.iea.org/energy-
system/buildings">https://www.iea.org/energy-system/buildings</a> footnote4) <a
href="https://archive.ipcc.ch/pdf/special-
reports/srren/SRREN_Full_Report.pdf">https://archive.ipcc.ch/pdf/special-
reports/srren/SRREN_Full_Report.pdf</a> footnote5) <a
href="https://archive.ipcc.ch/pdf/special-
reports/srren/SRREN_Full_Report.pdf">https://archive.ipcc.ch/pdf/special-
reports/srren/SRREN_Full_Report.pdf</a> footnote6) <a
href="https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/29889/climate-risks-
adaptation-power-
sector.pdf">https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/29889/climate-
risks-adaptation-power-sector.pdf</a> Climate Risk and Adaptation in the
Electric Power Sector. footnote7) https://www.iea.org/reports/climate-impacts-
on-african-hydropower/climate-impacts-on-african-hydropower footnote8) <a href="
https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/03/Chapter-2-Bioenergy-
1.pdf">https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/03/Chapter-2-Bioenergy-
1.pdf</a> Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change footnote9)  I) <a href="http
s://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-023-39497-
5">https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-023-39497-5</a> Circulation patterns
associated with trends in summer temperature variability patterns in North
America ,2024 footnote10)        I) <a href="https://www.nature.com/articles/s41
598-023-39497-5">https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-023-39497-5</a>
Circulation patterns associated with trends in summer temperature variability
patterns in North America .2024 footnote11)        I) <a
href="https://www.epa.gov/climateimpacts/climate-change-impacts-
energy">https://www.epa.gov/climateimpacts/climate-change-impacts-energy</a>
Climate Change Impacts on Energy .2024 footnote12) <a href="https://www.unido.or
g/sites/default/files/2009-
02/Module12_0.pdf">https://www.unido.org/sites/default/files/2009-
02/Module12_0.pdf</a> Energy efficiency technologies and benefits footnote13)
I)      <a href="https://www.irena.org/Innovation-landscape-for-smart-
electrification/Power-to-heat-and-
cooling/Status">https://www.irena.org/Innovation-landscape-for-smart-
electrification/Power-to-heat-and-cooling/Status</a> Power to Heat and Cooling
Status, IRENA 2023Power to heat and cooling: Status footnote14)     https://www.
esmap.org/sites/esmap.org/files/EBook_Climate%20Impacts%20on%20Energy%20Systems_
BOOK_resized.pdf footnote15)
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/sites/default/files/2021-06/15850
WB_Argentina%20Country%20Profile-WEB%20%281%29.pdf , World Bank Group, 2021
footnote16)  <a href="https://climate.ec.europa.eu/climate-change/consequences-
climate-change_en">https://climate.ec.europa.eu/climate-change/consequences-
climate-change_en</a>., European Union , Consequences of climate change, 2024
footnote17) I) https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/8/11/1115 Resilience of
Infrastructure Systems to Sea-Level Rise in Coastal Areas: Impacts, Adaptation
Measures, and Implementation Challenges, 2016 footnote18)
https://www.nature.com/articles/d44148-023-00219-8 footnote19)
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fevo.2022.931260/full footnote20)
https://www.nature.com/articles/d44148-023-00219-8 footnote21)
https://www.nature.com/articles/d44148-023-00219-8 footnote22)
https://www.un.org/esa/sustdev/sdissues/energy/op/hydro_basson_paper.pdf
footnote23) <a href="https://www.oecd.org/environment/resources/policy-
highlights-mainstreaming-biodiversity-into-renewable-power-
infrastructure.pdf">https://www.oecd.org/environment/resources/policy-
highlights-mainstreaming-biodiversity-into-renewable-power-
infrastructure.pdf</a> footnote24) Laiyin Zhu et al. Impacts of climate change
on cassava yield and lifecycle energy and greenhouse gas performance of cassava
ethanol systems: An example from Guangxi Province, China. December 2023 <a
href="https://www.sciencedirect.com/journal/journal-of-environmental-
management/vol/347/suppl/C">Volume 347</a>, 1 December 2023, 119162. <a
href="https://www.sciencedirect.com/journal/journal-of-environmental-
management">Journal of Environmental Management</a> footnote25)
https://www.oecd.org/environment/resources/policy-highlights-mainstreaming-
biodiversity-into-renewable-power-infrastructure.pdf footnote26)
https://www.oecd.org/environment/resources/policy-highlights-mainstreaming-
biodiversity-into-renewable-power-infrastructure.pdf footnote27)
https://www.oecd.org/environment/resources/policy-highlights-mainstreaming-
biodiversity-into-renewable-power-infrastructure.pdf footnote28) (REN21. 2023.
“Renewable Energy and Sustainability Report.” REN21. REN21.
https://www.ren21.net/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/REN21-RESR-2023_LowRes.pdf.)
footnote29) Ren21. 2024. “ Renewables 2024 Global Status Report Collection,
Global Overview.” Paris: REN21 Secretariat. footnote30) United Nations. n.d.
“What Is Renewable Energy?” United Nations. United Nations. Accessed April 6,
2024. https://www.un.org/en/climatechange/what-is-renewable-
energy#:~:text=SOLAR%20ENERGY&text=Solar%20technologies%20can%20deliver%20heat.
footnote31) IRENA. n.d. “Solar Energy.” Www.irena.org. International Renewable
Energy Agency. https://www.irena.org/Energy-Transition/Technology/Solar-energy.
footnote32) Ren21. 2024. “ Renewables 2024 Global Status Report Collection,
Global Overview.” Paris: REN21 Secretariat. footnote33) Ibid. footnote34)
Eisenson, Matthew. 2022. “Solar Panels Reduce CO2 Emissions More per Acre than
Trees — and Much More than Corn Ethanol.” Columbia Climate School. Columbia
University. October 26, 2022. <a
href="https://news.climate.columbia.edu/2022/10/26/solar-panels-reduce-
co2-emissions-more-per-acre-than-trees-and-much-more-than-corn-
ethanol/">https://news.climate.columbia.edu/2022/10/26/solar-panels-reduce-
co2-emissions-more-per-acre-than-trees-and-much-more-than-corn-ethanol/</a>.
footnote35) Ren21. 2024. “ Renewables 2024 Global Status Report Collection,
Global Overview.” Paris: REN21 Secretariat. footnote36) “Hydrofluorocarbons
(HFCs) | Climate & Clean Air Coalition.” n.d. The Climate and Clean Air
Coalition. UNEP. https://www.ccacoalition.org/short-lived-climate-
pollutants/hydrofluorocarbons-hfcs. footnote37) “Solar Thermal Energy - Climate
Action Accelerator.” n.d. Climate Action Accelerator. Climate Action
Accelerator. <a href="https://climateactionaccelerator.org/solutions/solar-
thermal-energy/">https://climateactionaccelerator.org/solutions/solar-thermal-
energy/</a>. footnote38) REN21. 2024. Weighted Average Cost of Capital for
Onshore Wind Power and Solar PV, by Country Income Level, 2022. Online Report.
Renewables 2024 Global Status Report Collection, Global Overview.
https://www.ren21.net/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/240404_GSR2024_GO.pdf.
footnote39) International Energy Agency. 2021. “Mineral Requirements for Clean
Energy Transitions – the Role of Critical Minerals in Clean Energy Transitions –
Analysis.” International Energy Agency. International Energy Agency. 2021.
https://www.iea.org/reports/the-role-of-critical-minerals-in-clean-energy-
transitions/mineral-requirements-for-clean-energy-transitions. footnote40) Piotr
Bojek. 2023. “Wind.” International Energy Agency. International Energy Agency.
June 2023. https://www.iea.org/energy-system/renewables/wind. footnote41) “What
Is the Carbon Footprint of Offshore Wind? .” 2023. Ørsted. Ørsted. 2023.
https://orsted.com/en/insights/the-fact-file/what-is-the-carbon-footprint-of-
offshore-wind. footnote42) “The Clean Air Benefits of Wind Energy.” 2014. The
American Clean Power Associatio. The American Clean Power Associatio. 2014. <a
href="https://cleanpower.org/resources/the-clean-air-benefits-of-wind-
energy/">https://cleanpower.org/resources/the-clean-air-benefits-of-wind-
energy/</a>. footnote43) Ren21. 2024. “ Renewables 2024 Global Status Report
Collection, Global Overview.” Paris: REN21 Secretariat. footnote44) The Global
Wind Energy Council. n.d. “Wind Power Is Crucial for Combating Climate Change.”
UNFCCC. The Global Wind Energy Council. <a href="https://seors.unfccc.int/applic
ations/seors/attachments/get_attachment?code=3L7GA4HNI182GHPA4S84CJ746DZUS9GR">h
ttps://seors.unfccc.int/applications/seors/attachments/get_attachment?code=3L7GA
4HNI182GHPA4S84CJ746DZUS9GR</a>. footnote45) REN21. 2023. “Renewable Energy and
Sustainability Report.” REN21. REN21. <a href="https://www.ren21.net/wp-
content/uploads/2019/05/REN21-RESR-2023_LowRes.pdf">https://www.ren21.net/wp-
content/uploads/2019/05/REN21-RESR-2023_LowRes.pdf</a>. footnote46) Piotr Bojek.
2023. “Wind.” International Energy Agency. International Energy Agency. June
2023. https://www.iea.org/energy-system/renewables/wind. footnote47) Ren21.
2024. “ Renewables 2024 Global Status Report Collection, Global Overview.”
Paris: REN21 Secretariat. footnote48) Global Environment Facility. 2011.
“Lessons Learnt from the UNDP-GEF Project ‘Kazakhstan — Wind Power Market
Development Initiative.’” The United Nations Development Programme. Kazakhstan:
UNDP Kazakhstan. <a href="https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/mig
ration/kz/7075-
25305.pdf">https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/migration/kz/7075-
25305.pdf</a>. footnote49) “IEA at COP27: The Role of Hydropower in Achieving
Climate Resilience - Event.” 2022. International Energy Agency. International
Energy Agency. November 15, 2022. <a href="https://www.iea.org/events/iea-at-
cop27-the-role-of-hydropower-in-achieving-climate-
resilience">https://www.iea.org/events/iea-at-cop27-the-role-of-hydropower-in-
achieving-climate-resilience</a>. footnote50) Kumar, A., T. Schei, A. Ahenkorah,
R. Caceres Rodriguez, J.-M. Devernay, M. Freitas, D. Hall, Å. Killingtveit, Z.
Liu, 2011. “Hydropower.” In IPCC Special Report on Renewable Energy Sources and
Climate Change Mitigation. [O. Edenhofer, R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, K.
Seyboth, P. Matschoss, S. Kadner, T. Zwickel, P. Eickemeier, G. Hansen, S.
Schlömer, C. von Stechow (eds)]. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge, United
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA. footnote51) (Kumar, A., T. Schei, A. Ahenkorah,
R. Caceres Rodriguez, J.-M. Devernay, M. Freitas, D. Hall, Å. Killingtveit, Z.
Liu, 2011. “Hydropower.” In IPCC Special Report on Renewable Energy Sources and
Climate Change Mitigation. [O. Edenhofer, R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, K.
Seyboth, P. Matschoss, S. Kadner, T. Zwickel, P. Eickemeier, G. Hansen, S.
Schlömer, C. von Stechow (eds)]. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge, United
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.) footnote52) Kumar, A., T. Schei, A. Ahenkorah,
R. Caceres Rodriguez, J.-M. Devernay, M. Freitas, D. Hall, Å. Killingtveit, Z.
Liu, 2011. “Hydropower.” In IPCC Special Report on Renewable Energy Sources and
Climate Change Mitigation. [O. Edenhofer, R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, K.
Seyboth, P. Matschoss, S. Kadner, T. Zwickel, P. Eickemeier, G. Hansen, S.
Schlömer, C. von Stechow (eds)]. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge, United
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA. footnote53) “ADDRESSING ENERGY’S INTERLINKAGES
with OTHER SDGs.” 2022. United Nations Department of Economic and Social
Affairs. United Nations. https://sdgs.un.org/sites/default/files/2022-
06/Policy%20Briefs%20-
2022%20Energy%27s%20Interlinkages%20With%20Other%20SDGs.pdf. footnote54)
“Fuelling the Ecological Crisis.” 2008. NABU (the Nature and Biodiversity
Conservation Union). Berlin, Germany: The Nature And Biodiversity Conservation
Union. https://www.nabu.de/imperia/md/content/nabude/energie/biomasse/15.pdf.
footnote55) “ADDRESSING ENERGY’S INTERLINKAGES with OTHER SDGs.” 2022. United
Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. United Nations. <a href="http
s://sdgs.un.org/sites/default/files/2022-06/Policy%20Briefs%20-
2022%20Energy%27s%20Interlinkages%20With%20Other%20SDGs.pdf">https://sdgs.un.org
/sites/default/files/2022-06/Policy%20Briefs%20-
2022%20Energy%27s%20Interlinkages%20With%20Other%20SDGs.pdf</a>. footnote56)
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe. n.d. “UNFC and Geothermal Energy
| UNECE.” Unece.org. United Nations Economic Commission for Europe.
https://unece.org/sustainable-energy/sustainable-resource-management/unfc-and-
geothermal-energy. footnote57) Fridriksson, Thráinn, Almudena Mateos Merino, A.
Yasemin Orucu, and Pierre Audinet. 2017. “Greenhouse Gas Emissions from
Geothermal Power Production.” Washington, DC. USA: The World Bank. footnote58)
The National Renewable Energy Laboratory. n.d. “Geothermal Electricity
Production Basics | NREL.” Nrel.gov. The National Renewable Energy Laboratory.
<a href="https://www.nrel.gov/research/re-geo-elec-
production.html">https://www.nrel.gov/research/re-geo-elec-production.html</a>.
footnote59) IRENA and IGA.2021. “United Nations Framework Classification for
Geothermal Energy: Pilot applications in the Caribbean, Ethiopia and Indonesia.”
www.irena.org. International Renewable Energy Agency. Abu Dhabi, International
Geothermal Association, Bonn. footnote60) Goldstein, B., G. Hiriart, R. Bertani,
C. Bromley, L. Gutiérrez-Negrín, E. Huenges, H. Muraoka, A. Ragnarsson, J.
Tester, V. Zui. 2011. “Geothermal Energy in IPCC Special Report on Renewable
Energy Sources and Climate Change Mitigation.” [O. Edenhofer, R. Pichs-Madruga,
Y. Sokona, K. Seyboth, P. Matschoss, S. Kadner, T. Zwickel, P. Eickemeier, G.
Hansen, S. Schlömer, C. von Stechow (eds)]. Cambridge University Press.
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA. footnote61) ———. 2023b. “Carbon
Capture, Utilisation and Storage - Energy System.” International Energy Agency.
International Energy Agency. January 2023. <a href="https://www.iea.org/energy-
system/carbon-capture-utilisation-and-storage">https://www.iea.org/energy-
system/carbon-capture-utilisation-and-storage</a>. footnote62) International
Institute for Sustainable Development. 2023. “Unpacking Carbon Capture and
Storage: The Technology behind the Promise.” International Institute for
Sustainable Development. International Institute for Sustainable Development.
2023. <a href="https://www.iisd.org/articles/insight/unpacking-carbon-capture-
storage-technology">https://www.iisd.org/articles/insight/unpacking-carbon-
capture-storage-technology</a>. footnote63) Global Carbon Capture and Storage
Institute. 2015. “CCS Applications.” Global Carbon Capture and Storage
Institute. Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute. <a
href="https://www.globalccsinstitute.com/archive/hub/publications/191078/fact-
sheet-ccs-applications.pdf">https://www.globalccsinstitute.com/archive/hub/publi
cations/191078/fact-sheet-ccs-applications.pdf</a>. footnote64) International
Institute for Sustainable Development. 2023. “Unpacking Carbon Capture and
Storage: The Technology behind the Promise.” International Institute for
Sustainable Development. International Institute for Sustainable Development.
2023. https://www.iisd.org/articles/insight/unpacking-carbon-capture-storage-
technology. footnote65) International Institute for Sustainable Development.
2023. “Unpacking Carbon Capture and Storage: The Technology behind the Promise.”
International Institute for Sustainable Development. International Institute for
Sustainable Development. 2023. <a
href="https://www.iisd.org/articles/insight/unpacking-carbon-capture-storage-
technology">https://www.iisd.org/articles/insight/unpacking-carbon-capture-
storage-technology</a>. footnote66) Carter, Angela, and Laura Cameron. 2023.
“Why Carbon Capture and Storage Is Not a Net-Zero Solution for Canada’s Oil and
Gas Sector.” International Institute for Sustainable Development. February 9,
2023. https://www.iisd.org/articles/deep-dive/carbon-capture-not-net-zero-
solution. footnote67) National Grid. 2023. “Hydrogen - What Is It? | Hydrogen
Energy | National Grid Group.” Www.nationalgrid.com. 2023. <a
href="https://www.nationalgrid.com/stories/energy-explained/what-is-hydrogen#:~:
text=Hydrogen%20can%20be%20used%20to">https://www.nationalgrid.com/stories/energ
y-explained/what-is-hydrogen#:~:text=Hydrogen%20can%20be%20used%20to</a>.
footnote68) REN21. 2024. “Renewables 2024 Global Status Report Collection,
Global Overview.” REN21. Paris: REN21 Secretariat. https://www.ren21.net/wp-
content/uploads/2019/05/240404_GSR2024_GO.pdf. footnote69) Hydrogen. n.d.
“Market Developments | Hydrogen.” Www.ren21.net. Accessed April 19, 2024. <a hre
f="https://www.ren21.net/gsr-
2023/modules/energy_supply/02_market_developments/04_hydrogen/">https://www.ren2
1.net/gsr-2023/modules/energy_supply/02_market_developments/04_hydrogen/</a>.
footnote70) Queisser, Ben. 2024. “Paving the Way for a Sustainable Future with
Hydrogen Energy.” World Economic Forum. April 3, 2024. <a
href="https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2024/04/unlocking-hydrogen-innovation-
paving-the-way-for-a-sustainable-
future/">https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2024/04/unlocking-hydrogen-innovation-
paving-the-way-for-a-sustainable-future/</a>. footnote71) International
Renewable Energy Agency. n.d. “Hydrogen.” Irena. <a
href="https://www.irena.org/Energy-Transition/Technology/Hydrogen#:~:text=It%20c
an%20be%20used%20to">https://www.irena.org/Energy-
Transition/Technology/Hydrogen#:~:text=It%20can%20be%20used%20to</a>.
footnote72) Scita, Rossana, Pier Paolo Raimondi, and Michel Noussan. “Barriers
to the Implementation of a Clean Hydrogen Economy.” Edited by Manfred Hafner.
Green Hydrogen: The Holy Grail of Decarbonisation? An Analysis of the Technical
and Geopolitical Implications of the Future Hydrogen Economy. Fondazione Eni
Enrico Mattei (FEEM), 2020. http://www.jstor.org/stable/resrep26335.5.
footnote73) UNFCCC. 2022. “Adaptation and Resilience.” Unfccc.int. 2022. <a
href="https://unfccc.int/topics/adaptation-and-resilience/the-big-
picture/introduction">https://unfccc.int/topics/adaptation-and-resilience/the-
big-picture/introduction</a>. footnote74) “Climate Resilience for Energy
Security.” n.d. <a href="https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/10229b31-fd82-
4371-b92c-
a554f95369ea/ClimateResilienceforEnergySecurity.pdf">https://iea.blob.core.windo
ws.net/assets/10229b31-fd82-4371-b92c-
a554f95369ea/ClimateResilienceforEnergySecurity.pdf</a> footnote75) Georgieva,
Kristalina, Vitor Gaspar, and Ceyla Pazarbasioglu. 2022. “Poor and Vulnerable
Countries Need Support to Adapt to Climate Change.” International Monetary Fund.
March 23, 2022. <a
href="https://www.imf.org/en/Blogs/Articles/2022/03/23/blog032322-poor-and-
vulnerable-countris-need-support-to-adapt-to-climate-
change">https://www.imf.org/en/Blogs/Articles/2022/03/23/blog032322-poor-and-
vulnerable-countris-need-support-to-adapt-to-climate-change</a>. footnote76)
Bower, Ward, Steve Glover, Jim Reilly, and Reilly Associates. n.d. “The Advanced
Microgrid Integration and Interoperability.” Accessed April 12, 2024. <a
href="https://www.energy.gov/oe/articles/advanced-microgrid-integration-and-
interoperability-march-2014">https://www.energy.gov/oe/articles/advanced-
microgrid-integration-and-interoperability-march-2014</a>. footnote77) “Success
Story—New Tool Connects Multiple Microgrids to Increase Community Resilience.”
n.d. Energy.gov. <a href="https://www.energy.gov/eere/articles/success-story-
new-tool-connects-multiple-microgrids-increase-community-
resilience">https://www.energy.gov/eere/articles/success-story-new-tool-
connects-multiple-microgrids-increase-community-resilience</a>. footnote78)
Minuto, Francesco Demetrio, and Andrea Lanzini. 2022. “Energy-Sharing Mechanisms
for Energy Community Members under Different Asset Ownership Schemes and User
Demand Profiles.” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 168 (October):
112859. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2022.112859">https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.rser.2022.112859</a>. footnote79) Ritchie, Hannah. 2021. “The Price of
Batteries Has Declined by 97% in the Last Three Decades.” Our World in Data.
June 4, 2021.https://ourworldindata.org/battery-price-
decline"https://ourworldindata.org/battery-price-decline. footnote80) “United
Nations Development Programme Delivering Sustainable Energy in a Changing
Climate Strategy Note on Sustainable Energy.” n.d. Accessed April 18, 2024.
https://www.un-energy.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/UNDP-Energy-
Strategy-2017-2021.pdf. footnote81)      Wood, Johnny. 2021. “Batteries Are a
Key Part of the Energy Transition. Here’s Why.” World Economic Forum. September
15, 2021. <a href="https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2021/09/batteries-lithium-ion-
energy-storage-circular-
economy/">https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2021/09/batteries-lithium-ion-energy-
storage-circular-economy/</a> footnote82) Nedjalkov, Antonio, Jan Christian
Meyer, Heiko Göken, Maximilian V Reimer, and Wolfgang Schade. 2019. “Blueprint
and Implementation of Rural Stand-Alone Power Grids with Second-Life Lithium Ion
Vehicle Traction Battery Systems for Resilient Energy Supply of Tropical or
Remote Regions.” Materials 12 (16): 2642–42. <a href="https://doi.org/10.3390/ma
12162642">https://doi.org/10.3390/ma12162642</a>. footnote83)        Office of
Energy Efficiency & Renewable Energy. 2018. “Pumped-Storage Hydropower.”
Energy.gov. 2018. https://www.energy.gov/eere/water/pumped-storage-hydropower.
footnote84) Assis Brasil Weber, Natália de, Julian David Hunt, Behnam Zakeri,
Paulo Smith Schneider, Fernando Sérgio Asfor Parente, Augusto Delavald Marques,
and Amaro Olímpio Pereira Junior. 2024. “Seasonal Pumped Hydropower Storage Role
in Responding to Climate Change Impacts on the Brazilian Electrical
Sector.” Journal of Energy Storage 87 (May): 111249. <a href="https://doi.org/10
.1016/j.est.2024.111249">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2024.111249</a>
footnote85) Hive Power. 2021. “Grid Stability Issues with Renewable Energy
Sources, How They Can Be Solved.” Www.hivepower.tech. March 22, 2021. <a
href="https://www.hivepower.tech/blog/grid-stability-issues-with-renewable-
energy-how-they-can-be-solved">https://www.hivepower.tech/blog/grid-stability-
issues-with-renewable-energy-how-they-can-be-solved</a>. footnote86) Hornsdale
Power Reserve. 2018. “Hornsdale Power Reserve.” Hornsdalepowerreserve.com.au.
2018. <a href="https://hornsdalepowerreserve.com.au/">https://hornsdalepowerrese
rve.com.au/</a> footnote87)       “Ontario Struggles with Solar Boom.” n.d. MIT
Technology Review. <a
href="https://www.technologyreview.com/2011/03/09/196484/ontario-
struggles">https://www.technologyreview.com/2011/03/09/196484/ontario-
struggles</a> with-solar-boom/ footnote88) IRENA. Bracing for Climate Impact:
Renewables as a climate change adaptation strategy. <a href="https://www.irena.o
rg/-
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2021/Aug/IRENA_Bracing_for_climate_impact_
2021.pdf">https://www.irena.org/-
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2021/Aug/IRENA_Bracing_for_climate_impact_
2021.pdf</a> footnote89) Serra, V., Ledda, A., Ruiu, M. G. G., Calia, G., & De
Montis, A. (2022). Integrating Adaptation to Climate Change into Sustainable
Development Policy and Planning. Sustainability, 14(13), 7634.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su14137634 footnote90) Integrating Climate Change
Adaptation into Development Co-operation POLICY GUIDANCE. (n.d.).
https://www.oecd.org/environment/cc/44887764.pdf footnote91) Framework, S.
(n.d.). Climate change adaptation UNFCCC Sustainable Development Goals 2030
Agenda Disaster Risk Reduction Reducing vulnerability and enhancing resilience
Opportunities and options for integrating climate change adaptation with the
Sustainable Development Goals and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015-2030.
https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/techpaper_adaptation.pdf
footnote92) IRENA. Bracing for Climate Impact: Renewables as a climate change
adaptation strategy. <a href="https://www.irena.org/-
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2021/Aug/IRENA_Bracing_for_climate_impact_
2021.pdf">https://www.irena.org/-
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2021/Aug/IRENA_Bracing_for_climate_impact_
2021.pdf</a> footnote93) Framework, S. (n.d.). Climate change adaptation UNFCCC
Sustainable Development Goals 2030 Agenda Disaster Risk Reduction Reducing
vulnerability and enhancing resilience Opportunities and options for integrating
climate change adaptation with the Sustainable Development Goals and the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030.
https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/techpaper_adaptation.pdf
footnote94) Mainstreaming Adaptation | Climate Change Adaptation. (n.d.).
Adaptation-Undp.org. https://adaptation-undp.org/mainstreaming-adaptation
footnote95) UNDP Climate Change Adaptation. (n.d.). Www.adaptation-Undp.org.
https://www.adaptation-undp.org/livelihoods footnote96) Ecosystem-Based
Adaptation | Climate Change Adaptation. (n.d.). Adaptation-Undp.org. <a
href="https://adaptation-undp.org/ecosystem-based">https://adaptation-
undp.org/ecosystem-based</a> adaptation footnote97) “Fostering Resilience for
Food Security | Climate Change Adaptation.” n.d. Adaptation-Undp.org.
https://adaptation-undp.org/fostering-resilience-for-food-security. footnote98)
“Coastal Adaptation | Climate Change Adaptation.” n.d. Www.adaptation-Undp.org.
https://www.adaptation-undp.org/coastal-adaptation. footnote99) “UNDP Climate
Change Adaptation.” n.d. Www.adaptation-Undp.org. https://www.adaptation-
undp.org/climate-information-and-early-warning-systems. footnote100) UNDP
Supports the Installation of a 14 MW Grid-Scale Battery Energy Storage System |
United Nations Development Programme. (n.d.). UNDP. <a
href="https://www.undp.org/mauritius-seychelles/news/undp-supports-
installation-14-mw-grid-scale-battery-energy-storage-
system">https://www.undp.org/mauritius-seychelles/news/undp-supports-
installation-14-mw-grid-scale-battery-energy-storage-system</a> endnote1)