Sustainable Energy Academy – Module 5: Intersectionality, Gender Equality, and
Social Inclusion in Sustainable Energy UNDP Sustainable Energy Hub April 19,
2024 Table of Contents Module Overview      3 Learning Objectives   3 The
Significance of the Topic 3 1     Intersectionality in Sustainable Energy
Disparities     3 1.1   Disparities in Sustainable Energy: An Overview  3 1.1.1
Global energy access and affordability disparities      3 1.1.2 Technological
Adoption and Infrastructure       4 1.1.3 Policy and Regulatory Landscapes
5 1.2   Intersectionality       6 1.2.1 Gender Inequalities     6 1.2.2 Racial
and Ethnic Disparities   7 1.2.3 Economic Inequalities   7 1.2.4 Urban vs. Rural
Divide  7 1.2.5 Age and Disability      7 1.2.6 Intersectional Disparities
Within Same Social Groups    7 1.3   Equity, Equality, and Justice in
Sustainable Energy     8 2     Promoting Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment
in the Energy Sector  10 2.1  Levelling knowledge on the Concepts     10 2.2
The Gender and Energy Nexus     14 2.2.1        Gender Inequality: an obstacle
to Sustainable Energy Access for all     14 2.2.2        Sustainable Energy
Solutions are key levers for Gender equality and Women Empowerment   18 2.2.3
Women’s participation in the clean energy sector        21 2.2.4        Women as
Agents of Change in Sustainable Energy 24 2.3  Mainstreaming gender in energy
programming and policies 28 2.3.1        Good practices for integrating gender
equality in energy programming    29 Integrated development strategies    29 Use
of gender-specific data and analysis 30 Participatory approaches 31 1.1.1.1
Strategies for enhancing access to training and finance opportunities   33
Technical training   33 Micro-financing      34 Gendered Budgeting   34 2.3.2
Gender mainstreaming in clean energy projects   35 2.3.3        Integrating
gender equality in energy policies and frameworks.  42 1.4  Mainstreaming Gender
in Mitigation and Technology       43 3    Addressing Energy Inequalities Among
Marginalized Communities   44 3.1  The Energy inequalities in marginalized
Communities     45 3.1.1        Remote/Rural Communities        46 3.1.1.1
Remote Communities across Regions       49 3.1.2        Indigenous Peoples
51 3.1.3        Fragile and Conflict contexts   56 Energy access in humanitarian
contexts       60 3.1.4        Informal Settlements    61 Wrap- Up and Key
Lessons Learned     66 Module Overview Learning Objectives 1)       Understand
Intersectionality in Energy Access: Learn about how various social identities
intersect to affect individuals' access to sustainable energy. 2)      Recognize
Gender Disparities: Identify gender disparities in the energy sector and
understand their implications for sustainable energy access and gender equality.
3)  Value Women's Empowerment: Comprehend the importance of empowering women
within the energy sector and its broader benefits to community development and
sustainability. 4)      Implement Inclusive Practices: Learn strategies for
integrating gender equality and social inclusion in energy programming,
policies, and projects. 5)  Enhance Energy Resilience: Understand the role of
sustainable energy in promoting resilience in fragile contexts and among
marginalized communities. The Significance of the Topic Energy interventions do
not reach or benefit different social groups in equal terms. Issues such as
gender, age, ethnicity, and migratory status, can amplify or reduce the benefits
energy policies and programs have on diverse social groups. In order to ensure
most people, benefit from similar measures from energy intervention, and to make
good on the promise to leave no one behind, it is imperative to apply gender and
intersectional approaches to energy interventions. In this module we will
explore the reasons for and benefits from applying such approaches and working
towards social inclusion through energy programming, as a tool to delivering
development goals. 1)    Intersectionality in Sustainable Energy Disparities
Disparities in Sustainable Energy: An Overview Disparities in the sustainable
energy sector are vast and multifaceted, impacting access to electricity and
clean cooking, investment in renewable resources, gender equality, and social
equity to mention a few. Global energy access and affordability disparities
Global energy access and affordability disparities are crucial issues to achieve
sustainable development, impacting billions of lives worldwide. These
disparities manifest in various forms, including the unequal distribution of
electricity access, limited access to clean cooking fuels and technologies, and
the financial ability of households to afford clean energy solutions. The
challenge is not just about providing access but ensuring that energy is clean,
affordable, reliable, and sustainable. As of 2021, about 675 million people
lacked access to electricity, and 2.3 billion were reliant on traditional
cooking fuels like wood, charcoal, and dung. These fuels pose significant health
risks due to indoor air pollution, contributing to millions of premature deaths
annually​. The majority of those without access to electricity reside in sub-
Saharan Africa, accounting for more than 80% of the global population lacking
electricity. Similarly, approximately 40% of the total population without access
to clean cooking fuels and technologies resides in this region. Alongside parts
of Asia, sub-Saharan Africa faces the most significant challenges in achieving
universal access to electricity and clan cooking. Technological Adoption and
Infrastructure Disparities in technological adoption and infrastructure within
the sustainable energy sector reveal significant challenges that impede global
progress towards energy equity and sustainability goals. These disparities
manifest across various dimensions. The adoption of renewable technologies and
the development of necessary infrastructure vary greatly between and within
countries. Developed nations often lead in deploying cutting-edge renewable
technologies and in the development of smart grids, energy storage solutions,
and EV charging networks. In contrast, many developing countries struggle with
basic infrastructure needs, such as reliable electricity and road networks,
which hampers their ability to adopt renewable technologies at scale​. Advanced
economies benefit from greater access to state-of-the-art renewable technologies
and the technical expertise to deploy them. These countries also have more
robust research and development ecosystems, driving innovation in energy
technologies. Meanwhile, developing countries may lack access to these
technologies and the expertise needed for their implementation, further widening
the gap in energy infrastructure development​. The integration of renewable
energy sources into the national grid requires a certain level of infrastructure
readiness, including the ability to manage the variability of renewables and to
store energy. Developed countries are more likely to have the necessary grid
infrastructure, such as smart grids and energy storage systems, to support a
high penetration of renewables. In contrast, the grid infrastructure in many
developing countries may be outdated or insufficient, posing significant
challenges to the integration of renewable energy​. Furthermore, clean cooking
significantly lags behind electrification efforts in almost every country.
Recent research highlights this disparity (IEA et al., 2021). Policies aimed at
promoting access to electricity tend to be more robust and generously funded
compared to those targeting clean cooking initiatives (ESMAP, 2020). For
instance, in 2019, a staggering USD 12.87 billion was allocated to support
electrification projects, while only USD 133.5 million was earmarked for clean
cooking initiatives (SE4All, 2021). This stark contrast underscores a crucial
gendered technological disparity: the disparity in attention and progress
between electrification and clean cooking efforts. Notably, electrification
projects often command more resources and attention in many regions compared to
initiatives focused on enhancing access to clean cooking technologies. This
imbalance can have a disproportionate impact on women and girls, who typically
shoulder the responsibility of household cooking activities and are more
susceptible to the health risks associated with traditional cooking fuels.
Rectifying this disparity is imperative for advancing gender equality and
ensuring universal access to sustainable energy solutions. Policy and Regulatory
Landscapes The policy and regulatory landscapes significantly influence the
adoption and implementation of sustainable energy technologies worldwide,
leading to disparities between and within countries. These disparities can
profoundly impact the pace and effectiveness of the transition to sustainable
energy systems. Developed countries typically have more robust policies and
incentives in place to support the adoption of renewable energy and energy
efficiency technologies. This includes subsidies, tax incentives, feed-in
tariffs, and renewable energy targets or mandates. These policy tools not only
encourage investment in renewable energy projects but also help to reduce the
cost of energy for consumers and businesses​. In contrast, developing countries
face regulatory barriers, including bureaucratic hurdles that slow down the
deployment of renewable energy projects, lack of clear and stable policy and
regulatory frameworks, and/or insufficient regulatory support for new
technologies. Such environments can deter both domestic and foreign investment
in renewable energy​. Intersectionality Intersectionality, a term coined by
Kimberlé Crenshaw, emphasizes how various social identities (such as race,
gender, class, and more) intersect to create unique experiences of advantage or
disadvantage. This framework is crucial in discussions of energy disparities
because it recognizes that people are not affected by policies and practices in
a uniform way. Instead, their experiences are shaped by the confluence of their
unique identities and social positions. Applying an intersectionality lens to
sustainable energy it uncovers how the interplay of various social dimensions
influences one's experience with energy access, sustainability, and justice. It
ensures that we consider the full range of human experiences in our analysis and
solutions, recognizing that a one-size-fits-all approach is insufficient for
addressing the layered complexities of energy disparities. This approach pushes
us toward more equitable and targeted strategies in the sustainable energy
sector that can effectively serve diverse populations according to their
specific needs and challenges. Intersectionality provides a framework for
understanding how overlapping identities including race, gender, class, and
others, contribute to unique experiences of oppression and privilege. In the
energy context, this approach helps identify how systemic inequalities affect
people’s access to clean and sustainable energy sources. Gender Inequalities
Women, particularly in low-income and rural areas, face significant barriers to
accessing clean energy resources. Their roles as primary caregivers and managers
of household energy needs, combined with socio-economic inequalities, mean that
energy poverty disproportionately affects them. For instance, the reliance on
traditional biomass for cooking not only consumes significant amounts of time,
limiting opportunities for education and income-generating activities but also
exposes women and children to harmful indoor air pollution. The WHO's finding
that 3.2 million people die annually from such pollution underscores the
severity of this issue​. Moreover, it is crucial to acknowledge that women do
not automatically reap the same benefits as men, particularly concerning
employment opportunities in the energy sector and access to technologies or
information vital for their livelihoods—an aspect often overlooked. These
critical elements will be further addressed in subsequent sections. Racial and
Ethnic Disparities Racial and ethnic minorities often face systemic barriers to
energy access and affordability. In many countries, these communities are in
remote or marginalized areas where infrastructure development, including energy,
is limited. The historical and ongoing marginalization of indigenous peoples,
for example, affects their access to land and resources, including energy
sources, further exacerbating energy inequities. Economic Inequalities
Socioeconomic status is a significant determinant of energy access. Low-income
households are less likely to afford the initial investment required for clean
energy technologies, such as solar panels or energy-efficient appliances,
despite the long-term savings they can offer. This economic barrier is
compounded for marginalized groups who already face higher rates of poverty and
unemployment. Urban vs. Rural Divide Geographical location plays a crucial role
in energy access disparities. Rural areas, especially in developing countries,
are often the last to receive infrastructure improvements, including access to
the electrical grid or clean cooking facilities. Urban areas, while generally
better electrified, can still exhibit stark disparities in energy access within
informal settlements or slums, where infrastructure is lacking or inadequate.
Age and Disability Age and disability introduce additional layers of
vulnerability in accessing and benefiting from sustainable energy. Elderly
people and those with disabilities may have specific energy needs for heating,
cooling, or medical equipment and face barriers in accessing energy services
that meet these needs adequately. Intersectional Disparities Within Same Social
Groups Within the framework of intersectionality and sustainable energy,
disparities are not only evident across broad social groups but also within
these groups, revealing layers of complexity that further underscore the
necessity for nuanced approaches to address energy access issues. In addressing
sustainable energy access, it's crucial to examine the compound disparities
within specific groups—how variables like disability, wealth, and social class
deepen the divide even among individuals sharing a similar identity marker such
as gender or race. This multi-layered issue reveals the intricate web of
inequality that complicates efforts towards achieving universal sustainable
energy access. For instance, among women, racial and ethnic differences can
significantly influence experiences with energy poverty. For instance,
racialized women often face compounded disparities due to systemic racism and
colorism, affecting their access to clean energy solutions and their
participation in energy decision-making processes. These disparities are
reflective of broader societal inequities that intersect with gender to create
unique challenges for women of color. In urban areas, disparities manifest in
the division between formal and informal settlements. Residents of informal
settlements, even within the same urban landscape, experience significantly
reduced access to reliable and clean energy compared to those in formal housing
areas. This division often correlates with racial and ethnic lines, with
minority groups disproportionately residing in less serviced, informal areas. In
other case, the urban-rural divide in energy access is well-documented, but
within both urban and rural contexts, disparities based on social class and
wealth further complicate the issue. In urban areas, low-income families may
live in poorly serviced neighborhoods with limited access to clean energy, while
in rural areas, the poorest households are often the last to be reached by
electrification efforts, if at all. Equity, Equality, and Justice in Sustainable
Energy Equity, equality, and justice in sustainable energy are crucial for
ensuring that all people benefit from the transition to renewable energy
sources, regardless of their socio-economic status, race, gender, or
geographical location. These principles are foundational to creating inclusive
energy solutions that address the needs and challenges of diverse communities,
promoting a fair distribution of energy benefits and burdens. By focusing on
these values, we can work towards a sustainable energy future that is accessible
and beneficial to everyone, particularly historically marginalized and
disadvantaged communities. Equity in sustainable energy refers to the fair
distribution of energy resources and services, taking into account the varying
needs and circumstances of different groups. Unlike equality, which implies
uniform distribution, equity recognizes that some groups require more support
than others due to historical disadvantages, geographic challenges, or socio-
economic conditions. By focusing on equity, energy policies can be tailored to
provide greater assistance to those who need it most, thereby leveling the
playing field and ensuring that all have access to clean, reliable, and
affordable energy. For instance, providing targeted subsidies to female-headed
households and vulnerable groups can help offset initial investment costs and
facilitate their access to sustainable energy solutions. Equality in sustainable
energy implies that everyone benefits from the same opportunities to access and
use energy resources. This concept is often operationalized through policies
that aim to uniformly reduce costs, remove barriers to access, and ensure that
new energy technologies are available to all. While equality is an admirable
goal, it does not account for the different starting points of various
individuals and communities, which is why equity can be a more precise tool for
policymaking. Justice in sustainable energy encompasses both distributive and
procedural dimensions. Distributive justice ensures that the benefits and
burdens of energy systems are shared fairly across society. This includes not
only the equitable distribution of energy resources but also the fair sharing of
environmental and health risks associated with energy production and
consumption. Procedural justice involves inclusive decision-making processes
that give all stakeholders, especially marginalized and underrepresented
communities, a voice in shaping energy policies and projects. >EQUALITY vs
EQUITY vs JUSTICE< Energy access plays a pivotal role in socio-economic
development by enabling advancements in health, education, and economic
opportunities. The availability of affordable, reliable, and sustainable energy
is a cornerstone for achieving broader development goals. The importance of
equity, equality, and justice in sustainable energy lies in their collective
ability to guide the transition toward systems that not only reduce greenhouse
gas emissions and mitigate climate change but also contribute to social and
economic development. These principles are vital for: --      Building community
resilience by ensuring that energy systems support the most vulnerable
populations. --       Fostering social cohesion by preventing the exacerbation
of existing societal fractures and gender gaps due to unequal energy access. --
Enhancing the legitimacy of the energy transition by ensuring that it is seen as
fair and just by all sectors of society, thereby increasing public support and
participation. 2)       Promoting Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment in the
Energy Sector 1)       Levelling knowledge on the Concepts Understanding the
interplay between gender equality and sustainable energy, requires a clear
conceptual understanding of the distinction between sex and gender, as well as
what are gender roles and gender gaps, and how they influence gender equality
and women’s empowerment. [Interactive – Flip cards] ¿Do you know the difference
between “Sex” and “Gender”? SEX: Sex typically refers to the inherent biological
and anatomical differences between male and female organisms, often classified
based on chromosomes, hormones, and reproductive organs, and determined at
birth. However, it's important to recognize that the interpretation and
classification of bodies, and thus the construction of sexual difference, are
shaped by socio-historical processes. As shown by Lacquer in his influential
work "Making Sex: Body and Gender from the Greeks to Freud", these processes
play a significant role in shaping societal perceptions of sex. It is worth
noting that sex is often assigned at birth based solely on external
characteristics, leading to challenges for intersex individuals who may not fit
traditional binary categorizations. Intersex people frequently lack legal
recognition due to their bodies being perceived as different. This lack of
recognition can contribute to stigmatization and result in multiple human rights
violations, including forced and coerced medical interventions. GENDER: Gender
encompasses the societal expectations, behaviors, activities, and
characteristics that are culturally ascribed to individuals based on their
perceived sex. As Judith Butler elaborates in her seminal work, gender is not an
inherent trait but rather a performative act, continuously constructed and
reinforced through repeated actions and interactions within social contexts.
These expectations and norms vary across cultures and societies, subject to
continual negotiation and transformation over time. Different societies hold
diverse notions of masculinity and femininity, and many recognize the existence
of multiple genders beyond the binary. Therefore, gender is not fixed or static
but rather fluid and dynamic, reflecting the complex interplay of social,
cultural, and historical influences. Gender roles refers to a collection of
cultural expectations that determine the acceptable, appropriate, or desirable
behaviors for individuals based on their actual or perceived sex. These roles
can involve a range of activities and attitudes and are acquired through
socialization processes. They are profoundly impacted by cultural, religious,
and economic factors and exhibit significant variation both within and among
different societies. For instance, the gender division of labor is a gender
role. Throughout the world, men are more likely to be associated with productive
roles, particularly in paid work and market production. Women are commonly
associated with reproductive roles, such as child-rearing, caregiving for family
members, and household management. Food preparation and serving in households is
frequently carried out by women, and in numerous developing nations, women are
also expected to cultivate the food, and invest time and effort collecting
cooking fuels and water for household use. More concepts can be explored through
the UNICEF Glossary of terms and concepts resource. [Resource] UNICEF Glossary
of terms and concepts – Gender Equality A useful resource which defines terms,
concepts and acronyms commonly used in gender discussion. Gender gaps, which
refer to the disparities between men and women, are present in all societies are
evident in various forms. Gender-based discrimination and the refusal to
acknowledge women's fundamental human rights are significant contributors to the
economic disadvantage experienced by women. Women globally face the challenge of
exerting more effort than men to ensure their economic well-being, while their
contributions to productivity have been historically disregarded or undervalued.
Women experience limited agency in managing their income and assets, and face
restricted access to education and employment opportunities in the formal labor
market. They are more prevalent in the informal sector, particularly in
occupations associated with caregiving, food processing or service provision.
Despite their increasing participation in the formal economy, women encounter
persistent challenges. Occupational segregation persists, with men dominating
technical positions and leadership roles while women are relegated to support
roles and low-ranking positions. This disparity extends to promotions within
organizations and political spheres. Women occupy subordinate social positions
and are inadequately represented in policy and decision-making arenas. Men
typically assume the role of representing the family in decision-making bodies
within communities and are more prone to reap advantages from the resources that
are accessible. Gender disparities in resource access and control stem from
societal norms, values, and rights, and are present across all societal strata.
Access refers to the entitlement to utilize a resource or advantage, whereas
control refers to the authority to make decisions regarding the utilization of a
resource or advantage. For instance, women may have access to household
electricity, but lack the authority to determine the placement of light fixtures
or the selection of appliances that could facilitate their work. Gender
inequality is a significant detriment to the full utilization of human
capabilities, impacting both men and women. And for the entirety of society and
therefore must be addressed. Recognizing this imperative, Gender Equality was
designated as one of the priority Sustainable Development Goals (SDG5) in 2015.
Achieving gender equality requires the empowerment of women and girls, along
with addressing the root causes of gender inequalities and challenge harmful
social norms engaging men and boys. [Definition] Gender Equality & Empowerment
Gender Equality refers to the equal rights, responsibilities and opportunities
of women and men and girls and boys. Equality does not mean that women and men
will become the same but that women’s and men’s rights, responsibilities and
opportunities will not depend on whether they are born male or female. Gender
equality implies that the interests, needs and priorities of both women and men
are taken into consideration, recognizing the diversity of different groups of
women and men. Gender equality is not a women’s issue but should concern and
fully engage men as well as women. Equality between women and men is seen both
as a human rights issue and as a precondition for, and indicator of, sustainable
people-centered development. Empowerment refers to the process of women and
girls gaining power and control over their own lives. This entails various
components, including awareness-raising, building self-confidence, expanding
choices, and increasing access to and control over resources. It also involves
taking actions to transform the structures and institutions that reinforce and
perpetuate gender discrimination and inequality. This implies that to be
empowered they must not only have equal capabilities (such as education and
health) and equal access to resources and opportunities (such as land and
employment), but they must also have the agency to use these rights,
capabilities, resources and opportunities to make strategic choices and
decisions (such as is provided through leadership opportunities and
participation in political institutions). Achieving gender equality requires
addressing the gender disparities faced by women and developing solution to
empower them. Women should be considered as a diverse interest group, with
varying needs, challenges and priorities that has been shaped by a multitude of
factors such as age, education level, economic status, cultural background and
geographical location. While this module may simplify gender dynamics by
referring to women and men in binary terms for readability, we acknowledge the
importance of recognizing differences, including various gender identities, for
robust gender analysis. UNDP recognizes that development challenges are dynamic
and interconnected, involving multidimensional risks that require systemic
solutions. The Strategic Plan 2022-2025 presents the 3x6x3 framework, designed
to propel integrated development solutions driven by country priorities. Energy
and Gender Equality are two of the six major solutions included in this
framework. Despite global efforts, progress towards gender equality has been
slow, sporadic and at times regressive. To accelerate progress and promote
gender equality and women’s empowerment, UNDP formulated the Gender Equality
Strategy 2022-2025. This strategy identifies specific activities aimed at
integrating gender perspective and achieving gender equality impacts into
Signature Solutions and accelerators. Concerning the Signature Solution 5
“Energy”, UNDP is committed to ensuring that energy policy support and
programming contribute to gender equality and women’s empowerment. UNDP focuses
on leveraging energy access to unleash women’s economic empowerment, supporting
energy investments that reduce time poverty, advocating for women’s inclusion in
energy governance, and generating new knowledge to guide a gender-just energy
transition. [Resource] UNDP’s Gender Equality Strategy 2022-2025 The report
recognizes the importance of shifting gender power dynamics, the need for more
sophisticated gender analysis, the usefulness or integration and resources to
help scaling up impact, the relevance of partnering with grassroots and women’s
organizations for shifting policy and the imperative of unlocking finance.
UNDP’s gender equality strategy puts gender equality at the center of each
direction of change, signature solution and enablers of the UNDP Strategic Plan
2022-2025. 2) The Gender and Energy Nexus 1)  Gender Inequality: an obstacle to
Sustainable Energy Access for all Gender roles, norms and disparities often
restrict women’s access to and control over energy resources and their
involvement in sustainable energy decision-making processes. These inequalities
hinder efforts towards sustainable energy intervention and result in failed
attempts to leave no one behind. Understanding how gender gaps affect energy
projects is fundamental for achieving inclusive and long-lasting solutions.
Women and men have different energy needs and distinct household energy usage.
For instance, women often spend more time on unpaid energy-intensive household
tasks, such as cooking and laundry, leading to different consumption patterns
within households. Gender also impacts consumer perception and adoption of
energy technologies. However, energy access projects typically target households
without considering these differences, resulting in solutions that may neglect
women and men particular needs and priorities. Additionally, gender-based
constraints prevent women from benefiting equally from energy access solutions
and interventions. For instance, lack of access to information on new energy
services or technologies, economic, digital or technical illiteracy, and limited
capacity-building opportunities impede women’s access to energy solutions.
Displacement, inequity in ownership or titling, limited access to formal job
opportunities also restricts women’s access to financial services, and their
ability to purchase such technologies or services. Female-headed households are
often poorer than male-headed households and are more likely to suffer
affordability concerns due to energy tariff increases. These factors
collectively result in more limited access to energy for women compared with
men. In communities with traditional gender roles, men often hold decision-
making power and control over budgets at household levels. Therefore, women have
limited participation on energy-related decisions, such as the type of fuel
used, the amount of energy purchased, and the appliances selected. This lack of
voice can hinder behavioral change or adoption of improved energy services that
benefit women. Due to this disadvantaged position, women have limited access to
stable energy. For example, according to a survey conducted in Gujarat, India,
in 2011, women were not allowed to use electricity freely in their homes, even
though 94% of the target households were connected to electricity and 65% of the
target households used firewood for cooking and heating.. Similarly, in
communities with prevalent traditional societal norms, women may not be included
in policy consultations and decision-making. Gender roles can also limit women’s
participation and engagement in clean energy solutions, such as clean cookstoves
and solar panels projects, and energy facility management associations. For
example, when residents establish a management association for an off-grid power
project, women may not be able to participate in the management association due
to their housework and care work responsibilities, or even as a result of social
norms which restrict their leadership opportunities. These situation constraint
women participation in community obstacles resulting in women's needs not being
easily reflected in the project. Furthermore, policies and country’s long-term
energy plans (i.e, electrification plans, power grid development plans, capital
investment plans, energy efficiency and renewable energy master plans) often
fail to reflect the needs and voices of women, who are the main users of energy.
The lack of proactive participation of women and reflection of their needs in
the planning stage may lead to negative impacts, such as inaccurate
identification of consumers’ electricity needs and inappropriate pricing. It may
also lead to inappropriate and ineffective policy responses, prioritization and
financing for electrification, and low carbonization and decarbonization at the
national level, inducing new gender inequalities and vulnerabilities, and
protest movements by civil society. Promoting women's participation and
improving access to the energy sector, and effectively utilizing women's
knowledge and experience, can create an inclusive and sustainable society. In
many societies, women are the main users of household energy, owing to gender
division of labor, and have diverse knowledge and experience in energy use.
Their roles collecting biomass, water and non-timber products, equip them to
identify suitable locations for renewable energy technology installation, such
as pico-hydro systems. In remote communities, women often dedicate more time
than men to managing stand-alone systems, such as solar home systems, due to
their greater household presence and responsibilities. However, their knowledge
and experience are often not effectively utilized because women's participation
in decision-making processes related to energy use and management is limited.
Ensuring stable access to affordable energy and resources requires the effective
use of the knowledge and experience of both women and men through the promotion
of women's participation in energy planning and management processes. The
unequal representation of women in the formal labor force and their lack of land
ownership hinders their access to financial assets. Gender norms also affect
formal rules, such as the requirement for immovable collateral, which women
often lack, and the need for multiple forms of identification. Consequently,
women face challenges in accessing both formal and informal credit for clean
energy solutions. Limited access to financing and investment stands as a major
barrier to energy access, especially for households led by women. Effective
promotion of energy access solutions and renewable energy diffusion requires
women’s financial inclusion. The Bidhaa Sasa last-mile finance and distribution
business empowers rural Kenyan women by providing access to finance. Women
represent 69% of all their clients, enabling them to purchase solar lamps, solar
systems, efficient cook stoves, LPG, and agricultural equipment, promoting clean
energy access and facilitating women's income generation (see Box XX) .
Recognizing the differences and gaps between women and men is fundamental for
achieving sustainable energy access goals. Interventions that overlook these
differences, termed "gender-blind", risk perpetuating inequalities. Therefore,
it is important to develop a long-term energy plan and master plan for energy
conservation and renewable energy with a gender perspective. This approach will
contribute to improving access to stable electricity for all and to promote the
introduction of renewable energy and energy conservation19. Empowering women to
maximize their potential through active participation in decision-making
processes and enhanced access to finance can not only help address the energy
challenges faced by many countries and promote the sustainable use of energy
resources but also contribute to building a more inclusive society and fostering
sustainable development. Box: Bidhaa Sasa, Kenya and Uganda Bidhaa Sasa, a
social enterprise operating in Kenya and Uganda, focuses on providing last-mile
finance and distribution services, primarily targeting low-income women who lack
access to traditional collateral. Through thorough customer research, Bidhaa
Sasa tailors its product and finance offerings to meet the specific needs of
women, aiming to increase their representation in both customer and loan
portfolios. To address the financial constraints of this demographic, Bidhaa
Sasa shifted to a group liability model, enhancing affordability and repayment
flexibility. By financing assets for individuals within groups of five, they
mitigate the risk of non-payment while fostering growth opportunities for each
member. Moreover, Bidhaa Sasa employs a direct-sales approach, primarily
facilitated by women, leveraging existing trust networks to reduce marketing and
acquisition costs. This initiative not only facilitates access to solar,
cooking, and agricultural technologies but also promotes women's financial
inclusion and fosters sustainable energy practices in underserved communities.
2)    Sustainable Energy Solutions are key levers for Gender equality and Women
Empowerment Lack of access to clean and affordable energy exacerbates gender
inequalities, particularly impacting women and girls. Socially constructed and
gender-defined roles and responsibilities on energy production and use (e.g.,
cooking, cleaning, food drying and preparation) make women and girls bear the
main burden of biomass collection. Lack or limited energy access affects women
and girls by virtue of the toll it takes on their time, resulting in time
poverty. Women spend considerable time gathering biomass for energy. Because
they undertake these activities largely on foot, climate-induced scarcity of
natural resources can exacerbate their time poverty, as women are forced to
travel and spend more time collecting these resources. It is worth noting that
there are almost 400 million women household biomass producers worldwide. They
constitute the largest, and largely invisible, workforce in our global energy
system. Rural women participation in the informal and biomass-dependent economic
sectors tends to be neglected in national energy policies.. Energy and time
poverty hampers their ability to engage in self-nurturing activities such as
education. Owing to limited access to stable energy for women and girls, many
women in poor rural and urban areas spend much of their time and effort in labor
to obtain the energy necessary for daily activities, including traditional and
inefficient fuels such as firewood and cow dung. For example, the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) indicates that girls between the ages of 5 and 14 spend
40% more time doing unpaid domestic work and collecting water/firewood than boys
of the same age do. Moreover, in some regions of India, women spend 1 hour and
20 minutes per day collecting firewood. In other regions, women gathering
firewood, crop waste and cattle dung fulfil 92 percent of rural domestic energy
needs. They gather 85 percent of their cooking fuel from forests, village
commons and fields. Indoor pollution from the burning of solid fuels is a
serious health problem for women and girls. Every year, 4.3 million
people—mainly women and children—die as a result of indoor air pollution. By
2030, indoor air pollution from biomass use is likely to cause more than 1.5
million deaths per year. Factors such as workload and poor nutrition also
increase women’s susceptibility to health risks, including anaemia and perinatal
mortality. Drudgery from these traditional fuel collections (e.g. fetching and
carrying fuel wood) takes a significant toll on women’s and girls’ health and
well-being, affects prenatal mortality and increases post-delivery
complications. These activities can also expose women to attacks by wildlife and
to gender-based violence. Energy poverty is one aspect of broader economic
poverty and has similar, marked gender characteristics. A higher percentage of
women than men live in poverty. Poverty affects women and men differently, with
women often experiencing the most severe levels of deprivation. Energy poverty
may in many ways be seen as one facet of economic poverty that could be
demonstrated by the fact that women generally tend to have disproportionately
lower access to cleaner energy options. The effects of energy poverty on women
and girls are harsh and far-reaching and include the physical and time effects
of drudgery in household work and care work, health effects of indoor pollution
and decreased school attendance. On the contrary, access to reliable, clean,
affordable, and modern energy can alleviate women’s drudgery, improve access to
information and communication, and ensure a healthier indoor environment.
Electricity can also power public buildings, institutions, and community spaces.
By electrifying schools and health centers, communities can provide better
educational opportunities for women and enhance maternal health services. This
not only reduces traditional caregiving responsibilities but also contributes to
overall societal well-being. Ensuring access to affordable and stable energy can
improve the lives and health of women and girls. Regarding livelihood
improvement, for example, access to energy for women and girls engaged in unpaid
domestic works can reduce the burden of such works by enabling them to use clean
cooking technologies and boil water by electricity. In addition, it contributes
to the availability of time, which may increase opportunities for schooling and
employment, and income generation for women. For example, it has been reported
that girls in Brazil who live in rural areas with access to electricity are 59%
more likely to complete primary education by age 18 than those without.
Furthermore, women will no longer have to walk long distances to find firewood
and other fuels, which will reduce their health risks such as bronchitis,
cataracts, and low vision caused by indoor air pollution from cooking with
firewood or other fuels. Furthermore, expanding women's access to energy can
lead to their economic empowerment. For example, a study in Nicaragua reported
that access to stable electricity in the form of lighting and modern cooking
equipment use allowed them to perform domestic labor more efficiently and
increased rural women's employment outside the home by 23%. 3)    Women’s
participation in the clean energy sector The energy sector remains largely male-
dominated—the World Economic Forum estimated that women made up less than 20% of
the labor force in 2015. A survey conducted by USAID as part of its Engendering
Utilities program extrapolates that women make up an estimated 13% of the
utilities workforce in Eastern Europe, the Middle East and Africa. Additionally,
the survey found that utilities do not often disaggregate employment by gender
nor offer interventions that improve or monitor gender equality in hiring
practices. Although the renewable energy sector is also male-dominated, studies
suggest that women’s participation in the sector may be greater than in the
traditional energy sector. The International Renewable Energy Agency’s (IRENA)
2015 survey among private energy companies showed that women represent an
average of 32% of the workforce of those surveyed. The survey also shed light on
the roles women fulfill in the sector, representing 46% of the administrative
workforce, 28% of the technical workforce and 32% of management roles. The
relative newness and non-traditional nature of clean energy presents an
invaluable opportunity to scale up a gender-responsive approach that empowers
women to play an active role in the sector. Gender equality has not been well
promoted in the energy sector, partly owing to the limited participation of
women in economic activities, as explained below. For example, with respect to
employment, women constitute 48% of the global workforce, however, only 22% of
the oil/gas sector and 32% of the renewable energy workforce. In patent
classifications closely related to the energy sector (combustion devices,
engines, pumps, and electricity), the number of applications filed by women is
less than 11% of the total. One reason is that the gender biases and social
norms discourage girls and young women to study Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) related fields, which in turn restricts them
from acquiring energy-related expertise and skills. In addition, energy-related
organizations, such as electric power utilities, have often entrenched gender
norms, citing men as more suitable for technical/professional posts. These
factors have prevented the development of female engineers and experts, and the
number of women employed in the energy sector tends to be limited. According to
IRENA, 75% of women perceived that women working in the modern renewable energy
sector or seeking such work face gender-related barriers. These barriers include
prevalent hiring practices, as well as unequal access to employment entry
points, such as apprenticeships. Moreover, women working in the energy sector
earn less than men, and even less than in non-energy sectors. The International
Energy Agency (IEA) report compares gender wage gaps within the same company, as
well as between different firms, across the energy and non-energy sectors. While
there isn’t much difference in the gender wage gap for energy and non-energy
within the same company, that difference becomes more profound in energy sectors
across different companies. Women in the energy sector also tend to work more in
firms where wages are not as high, more so than in the non-energy sector. Wages
for women in energy are also 19% lower than for men, an even greater gap than in
the non-energy sector. Data shows the wage gap stays the same when accounting
for ability, education and potential experience, implying that the gap is not
because of gender differences in skill levels. The IEA data highlights
significant gender gaps in the energy sector. Only one in five leadership roles
in the energy sector are held by women, according to the World Economic Forum’s
Global Gender Gap Report 2022. And that’s after 14 years of consecutive year-on-
year increases, according to gender gap data from the IEA. from the World Energy
Forum (WEF) shows that women’s participation in the energy sector, particularly
as high-level decision makers, remains low. Just 20% of senior management roles
are held by women in the energy sector. Fewer women are hired into senior roles
in energy than in most other industries. Moreover, women comprise only 16% of
board positions among 200 top utility companies. Studies conducted by IUCN in
2015 found that women occupy only 4% of the Chair positions on the World Energy
Council (WEC) and 18% of the Secretary positions, while only 10% of Energy
Ministries were headed by women. When women are excluded from energy governance,
decision-making processes are more likely to result in energy projects and
policies that ignore the unique needs, knowledge and contributions of women. An
Ernst and Young study confirms that having greater numbers of women on boards
translates into higher returns on equity and investment, with the top 20 most
diverse utilities outperforming the less diverse ones—a difference that can
constitute millions of dollars in profit. 4)    Women as Agents of Change in
Sustainable Energy Women in energy jobs improve the efficiency of the energy
supply chain. Women tend to have different social networks than men, through
which they can access households that are difficult to reach for men. Moreover,
it has been reported that as women's income increases, they reinvest 90% of
their income (30-40% for men) into their families and communities and that a
greater proportion is spent on food and children's education in their
households, which could improve the health and quality of life of the entire
household. Gender mainstreaming in the energy sector can help achieve healthy
societies where people can lead prosperous lives by raising the income of women,
who constitute half of the world's population, and is an important measure for
increasing economic and development effects at the national level. According to
World Bank study in 141 countries, women earn less than men and have lower human
capital wealth (the value of the future earnings of a country's adult citizens)
figures. This inequality has resulted in a global loss of human capital wealth
of US$160.2 trillion, according to the report. Women and men are key agents of
change whose unique but often differentiated knowledge, skills, and experience
are central to economic development as well as environmental sustainability.
There is strong empirical evidence establishing that gender equality and women’s
empowerment are key for the achievement of the SDGs. Research from the McKinsey
Global Institute finds that, if women were to participate in the economy
“identically to men”, they could add as much as US$28 trillion, or 26 percent,
to annual global GDP (roughly the combined size of current US and Chinese
economies) by 2025. As primary users and managers of biomass products in many
communities, women play an essential role in natural resources management as
well as in other productive and reproductive activities at the household and
community levels. This puts them in a position to contribute to livelihood
strategies adapted to changing environmental conditions, including climate
change. Review of 17 studies in natural resources management demonstrates that
increased participation by women lead to improvements in local natural resource
governance and forest (and fisheries) conservation efforts in India and Nepal.
For example, one study examined found that women’s participation is associated
with a 28 percent greater probability of forest regeneration. Strong evidence
(e.g., India and Nepal) shows conservation outcomes were improved in forest
projects by providing women with more powers in decision-making. Supporting
women to develop and manage greener technologies and green and renewable energy
sources contributes to national mitigation strategies, provides new employment
opportunities, contributes to poverty reduction and promotes women’s economic
empowerment. For example, the Grameen Shakti project in Bangladesh has trained
over 30,000 local women to install and maintain solar systems and provides
micro-loans to purchase domestic solar systems. Starting and running a business
in any sector poses unique challenges for women, including institutional
barriers to entry, tax policies and access to finance. The following chart
demonstrates the share of start-ups with gender-diverse founders for energy and
non-energy sectors. Figure XX: Evolution over time of the share of start-ups
with gender diverse founders (founding year) for the selected sectors (Energy,
Non-energy) >A screenshot of a computer Description automatically generated< As
indicated in the chart, the energy sector trails behind other sectors, which is
damaging to economic growth, income equality and social inclusion. Just 11% of
start-up founders are women in the energy sector, compared with nearly 20% in
other industries. This is while unlocking the potential of female entrepreneurs
across all sectors could increase global GDP by $1.5 trillion a year. Despite
their small share, women are at the forefront of entrepreneurship and innovative
energy solutions in the production, distribution and servicing of energy
technologies. Evidence shows that women entrepreneurs are in a better position
to interact and engage with consumers. For example, Kopernik’s ‘Wonder Women’
Initiative and Solar Sister tailor marketing strategies, capacity building and
business development to invest in women as entrepreneurs to deliver last-mile
solutions. In a similar manner, the Empowered Entrepreneur Training Program, a
USAID-supported training program created by Johns Hopkins University, the Global
Alliance for Clean Cookstoves and the Visionaria Network and implemented by
Winrock International teaches women to develop their business skills, agency and
leadership, to take advantage of their environment and become successful
entrepreneurs. A study in Kenya found that women who participated in the agency-
based training program sold nearly three times as many cookstoves as their male
counterparts. These strategies deliver improved energy access and advance
women’s economic empowerment and other social benefits, including by positioning
women as role models in the technology industry. Biogas programs in Nepal and
Vietnam (Box XX) have invested in building women’s skills as masons to support
their participation in the production of biodigesters and to become owners of
biodigester companies. Efforts such as those from Barefoot College in India and
Grameen Shakti in Bangladesh have proven that illiterate women can become solar
engineers and bring both light and a gender- responsive paradigm shift to rural
communities. Box XX: SNV – Bio-Energy for Circular Agriculture (BeCA) project,
Vietnam The Bio-energy for Circular Agriculture (BeCA) project, funded by the
Australian Government from 2021 to 2024, aims to upscale biogas-based
electricity generation in large livestock farms in Vietnam. It involves five key
partners: the Australian Government, E-GREEN, SNV, Nexus for Development, and HD
Bank, each contributing expertise and resources to achieve the project's
objectives. The project targets over 8,500 medium and large pig farms in Vietnam
with existing biogas digesters, aiming to provide them with cost-effective,
secure, and sustainable energy solutions. E-GREEN's biogas-to-electricity
solution will not only reduce farm energy costs by 20 – 30% but also generate
clean electricity for internal use and sale back into the national grid, thus
reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The partnership will prioritize women-led
farms, ensure equal ownership of biogas generation systems, offer flexible
working conditions, and provide inclusive training tailored to women to promote
their participation in business. 3)  Mainstreaming gender in energy programming
and policies Gender mainstreaming, rooted in the Beijing Platform for Action,
aims to embed gender equality into policies, programs and projects. As defined
in the <a href="https://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/csw/GMS.PDF">1997 agreed
conclusions of ECOSOC,</a> gender mainstreaming involves assessing the
implications of planned action on both women and men across all levels and
areas. It is a strategy seeking to integrate women’s and men’s concerns and
experiences into the design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of
policies and programmes across all political, economic and societal spheres to
ensure equal benefit and prevent perpetuating inequalities. Gender equality
stands as the overarching development goal, while gender mainstreaming is a set
of specific, strategic approaches and technical and institutional processes to
achieve it. Various tools exist to measure the integration of gender equality
into these instruments. For instance, UNDP Gender Marker, based on OECD's gender
marker, is a corporate monitoring tool used to track financial investments,
aimed at advancing gender equality women empowerment. Projects are coded on a
four-point scale, with GEN0 indicating projects not expecting to contribute to
gender equality and GEN3 representing projects where gender equality is a
principal objective. [Resource] GENDER MARKERS GEN0: Outputs at the project
level are not contributing to gender equality. No activities or components of
the output contribute to the promotion of gender equality. GEN0 output at the
project levels are “gender blind” and it is therefore recommended to reduce as
much the GEN0 rated outputs. GEN1: Output at the project level contributes in a
limited way to gender equality, but not significantly. Gender equality is not
consistently mainstreamed and has not been critical in the project design.
Nevertheless, some aspect(s) of the output at the project level (i.e. one or
more of its activities) are expected to promote gender equality but not in a
consistent way. GEN2: Gender equality is not the main objective of the expected
output, but the output promotes gender equality in a significant and consistent
way. Must be evidence that a gender analysis has been done, that there will be
change related to gender equality/women’s empowerment and there are indicators
to measure/track this change. Sometimes called “gender mainstreamed”
initiatives, where gender equality is adequately integrated as a cross-cutting
issue by the rationale, activities, indicators and budget associated with the
output. GEN3: The achievement of gender equality and/or the empowerment of women
are an explicit objective of the output and the main reason that this output was
planned. Narrowing gender inequalities or empower women is the main reason this
initiative is being undertaken. The extent to which policies and programs
consider gender can be defined according to a gradation of term ranging from
gender-harmful to gender-transformative. These terms denote varying impacts on
gender equality and women’s empowerment. The CARE’s Gender Continuum defines
these terms as follows: [Interactive - Flip Card / expandable text] - Gradations
to measure achievements in integrating gender into policy and programs Gender-
harmful: Programming that ignores the economic/ social/political roles, rights,
entitlements, responsibilities, obligations, and power relations associated with
being female and male; as well as the dynamics between and amongst men and
women, boys and girls Gender-neutral: Programming that works with gender norms.
Reinforces and may take advantage of pre-existing gender inequitable structures,
systems, and divisions in society relating to gender. Does not consider how
gender roles and relations can impede the achievement of programming outcomes,
or how programming can negatively affect gender roles and relations. Gender-
sensitive: Programming that adapts to gender norms. Works around existing gender
differences and inequalities to ensure equitable allocation/ services/support
aligned with the pre-existing gender differences, structures, systems, and power
divisions in society. Aware of the effect of leveraging inequitable gender norms
for the outcomes of programming. Gender-responsive: Programming that challenges
inequitable gender norms. Responds to the different needs and constraints of
individuals based on their gender and sexuality. Opens space for discussing,
challenging, and engaging with inequitable gender structures, systems,
divisions, and power relations. Provides the opportunity for participants to
question, experiment and challenge gender inequities. Gender-transformative:
Policies and programs that change inequitable gender norms and relations to
promote equality. Not only has the ambition to transform gender, but has the
resources, willingness and capacity to institutionalise transformative
programming 1)     Good practices for integrating gender equality in energy
programming Integrated development strategies Energy projects are often designed
to address a very specific problem or need. In many cases, though, they might be
more effective if they were incorporated into broader, integrated development
approaches that make it possible to address a number of issues simultaneously.
This is a complex process, since it involves first determining the overall
priorities of the people who are the intended beneficiaries, both men and women,
and then working with them to design projects that will assist them in improving
their livelihoods and making them more sustainable. It also requires
coordination with other development experts and organizations. The range of
activities can be quite broad, since there is no vested interest in a particular
issue or technology. Most projects fall short of a fully integrated development
approach focused on overall community needs. Organizations and programs, as well
as government ministries, are divided by sectors, which makes it hard for them
to work in an integrated way, especially when they are charged with addressing
very specific issues, such as rural electrification, improved sanitation, or
setting up protected areas to preserve biodiversity. In addition, within
specific sectoral programs, such as energy for sustainable development, many
organizations focus primarily on one type of technology – for example, solar
panels, biogas, improved stoves, micro-hydro systems, or mini-grids. However,
even in the single-issue type of project, it is still possible to consider the
overall socio-economic context of the project, and to determine the priorities
of both men and women so that the intervention is more likely to have a positive
impact on their livelihoods, including generation of jobs in the clean energy
value chain. Use of gender-specific data and analysis Insufficient documentation
of gender disparities is a barrier to recognizing and addressing gender issues
effectively. Collecting sex-disaggregated data allows decision-makers,
environment and energy institutions and development agencies to better
understand who is using existing resources, such as land, forest and water, and
what they are doing with it. Information about women’s time and work profiles is
particularly critical in environment and energy initiatives, as is information
on women’s control over resources, such as data on women’s status with respect
to land tenure, credit availability and activities that lead to land degradation
or deforestation This data can also serve to identify potential barriers to
access jobs in the clean energy value chain, financial mechanisms, or to
leadership positions. Where patterns of gender difference and inequality are
revealed in sex-disaggregated data, gender analysis is used to examine why the
disparities are there, whether they are a matter for concern, and how they might
be addressed. Understanding men’s and women’s roles and responsibilities as part
of the planning of interventions helps targeting of actions, improves project
effectiveness and ensures that women, as well as men, can play their part in
national development. A gender ‘efficiency’ approach emphasizes that gender
analysis makes good economic sense in the overall development context. Targeted
analyses help to generate discussion and critically assess needs, while
examining policy alternatives, formulating effective policies and programs,
monitoring progress, and evaluating results.. For example, with support from the
World Bank's Living Standards Measurement Study Plus (LSMS+) Program, countries
as Cambodia are implementing a new generation of household surveys with improved
methods to capture key dimensions of men’s and women’s economic opportunities
and welfare (See Box XX). Box XX: World Bank's Living Standards Measurement
Study Plus (LSMS+) Program The Living Standards Measurement Study (LSMS) is the
World Bank's flagship household survey program focused on strengthening
household survey systems in client countries and on improving the quality of
microdata to better inform development policies. Established in 2016, the Living
Standards Measurement Study – Plus (LSMS+) program works to enhance the
availability and quality of intra-household, self-reported, individual-
disaggregated survey data collected in low- and middle-income countries on key
dimensions of men’s and women’s economic opportunities and welfare.
Participatory approaches Traditionally, women have been excluded from decision-
making as a result of attitudes concerning their roles and status, and also due
to aspects of women’s own work burdens, knowledge, skills and confidence. This
is particularly true in environment and energy activities, which often require
technical knowledge and training, and are traditionally male dominated.
Participatory approaches are needed, ensuring that women, not just men, are
consulted. However, participatory approaches can also be either gender-blind or
gender-responsive depending on the people who manage them. The questions asked,
the issues explored, and the range of information explored, as well as the
identification of proposals and actions, depend on what is considered relevant.
There are many practical measures to promote women’s involvement in decision-
making: Consultation processes responsive to women’s constraints can be
organized so that project information reaches women, they are able to attend
meetings, and the meetings provide a forum in which women can actively
participate. It is imperative to ensure that the language is accessible to
women, that the times and locations of the consultations take into account
women's mobility (locations closer to their households) and care roles
(including with identification of times that are appropriate for women and
providing care options for their family members, for example). Open discussions
involving both men and women may not be adequate to facilitate women’s
participation; specific measures may be needed to overcome social prohibitions
against women speaking out in front of men. It may also be necessary to follow
up large meetings with smaller planning groups, where women’s roles,
responsibilities, priorities and constraints can be elaborated in more detail.
One approach has been to arrange meetings in situ at, for example, water supply
sites, where women tend to gather regularly as part of their daily chores.
Consultations that build support from men, particularly community leaders, can
promote positive attitudes towards women’s active participation in decision-
making processes. Men’s negative attitudes towards women’s increased involvement
have often shifted once the real benefits to the community, households, and
women themselves have been demonstrated. Ensuring women’s involvement in
management committees, such as in the water sector, gives them practical
opportunities to take an active role in community-level decision-making. For
women who are not used to assuming positions of authority, considerable
groundwork and experience may be needed for them to develop the self-confidence
and assertiveness skills necessary for dealing with village authorities.
However, this should be in combination with the sensitization of men, to ensure
women are not relegated to ceremonial positions. Therefore, women
representatives may need special training in leadership skills, confidence
building and communication Building gender-responsive partnerships between
community representatives and local authorities can be an effective way to raise
awareness concerning women’s needs. With appropriate support and training,
community representatives can negotiate effectively for gender-responsive
services. At the same time, staff in municipal authorities can increase their
understanding of gender issues and accept their responsibility for delivering
gender-aware activities Strategies for enhancing access to training and finance
opportunities Based on the gender analysis, one could identify if/which
differentiated needs are there in terms of access to training and finance
opportunities and then tailor actions accordingly. Technical training Operating
equipment and machinery is often considered to lie within the domain of men’s
work, so technical experts, educators and extension workers may not include
women. Community members may also oppose women’s engagement in certain
activities, such as technical jobs, as a result of existing social norms.
However, programs can be designed to make training more accessible to women, if
it is offered at times and locations compatible with women’s family roles, and
adapted to women’s levels of skills and confidence. Trainers can be coached on
gender concerns, or selected for their support of women’s enterprises and social
advancement. Trainers also need to be sensitive to the fact that women often
feel more comfortable in women-only environments when acquiring new technical
skills. Efforts to sensitize community members, including community leaders, are
also important tools for increasing women’s participation in those
opportunities. Micro-financing In energy programming, micro-financing schemes
can improve women’s access to new electricity generation technologies or clean
cooking solutions, can enhance women’s access to electrical appliance for
income-generation and can support women energy entrepreneurs. Both women and men
require access to credit and savings facilities for productive purposes.
However, women often face special constraints regarding access to financial
services, especially since their rights to own land and other collateral may be
limited. They may also rate their financial skills / knowledge lower than men;
require support with financial literacy or be rated in a more stringent manner
than men when it comes to their business plans. This gender constrains to access
finance are higher for rural women, especially those working on agriculture and
family-farming sectors. For instance, an analysis of credit schemes in Kenya,
Malawi, Sierra Leone, Zambia and Zimbabwe revealed that women receive less than
10 percent of all credit earmarked for smallholder farmers and only one percent
of the total credit to agriculture. In collaboration with government extension
services, many NGOs and donors have encouraged the development of women’s
rotating credit and savings activities to generate cash for income-generating
energy programs. Gendered Budgeting In principle, public expenditures on social
services and infrastructure are allocated on the assumption these investments
are gender-neutral. In practice, however, men and women have different needs,
and they use and benefit from services differently; budget allocations may not
reflect those differences. Budgetary allocations have the power to transform
gender inequalities. Gender budgeting is a tool that can be used to break down
and identify the differentiated impacts of public revenue allocations and
expenditures as they affect men and women. Any analysis should look at inputs,
outputs, and outcomes. 2)       Gender mainstreaming in clean energy projects
Gender mainstreaming in a project means integrating a gender perspective in all
the stages of the project: planning, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation
and Impact Assessment: Project Planning Phase The project planning phase
consists of two sub- phases. Firstly, the Problem Identification phase mandates
a thorough assessment of the situation, using data disaggregated by sex, income,
ethnic origin, and age. Inclusivity is key, necessitating the involvement of
women and women’s NGOs in strategy development and agenda-setting. To ensure a
comprehensive understanding, a gender assessment is needed to understand
differentiated needs and identify manners for integrating women and men benefit
sharing, from access to job opportunities in the clean value chain, to support
to their livelihoods and enhanced participation in decision making. This
assessment informs current energy users and their respective needs. Equally
important is the active participation of women from the community in stakeholder
analyses, ensuring their voices are heard and considered. Separated women and
men groups can be effective strategies to ensure it. Also, ensure times and
locations of meetings are convenient and culturally acceptable for women. The
analysis should identify current livelihood strategies of women and men, and the
role of energy technologies in those strategies. It also should identify the
priorities of men and women in terms of improving their livelihoods and
determine how energy technologies can advance those aims. The second phase is
the project formulation, which is composed of 4 steps. First, the different
roles and responsibilities of women and men, as well as their diverse energy
needs and uses should be documented. This step should also capture and reflect
on women’s specialized knowledge, including on household fuels and energy
technologies. Furthermore, potential obstacles hindering women’s participation
and benefits (e.g., discriminatory attitudes and lack of time) should be
understood and addressed, with strategies formulated to mitigate these risks.
The impact of the initiative regarding the workload of women/men/girls/boys
should be assessed. The views of women and men on the value of proposed
interventions should also be captured. The document should also identify gender
differences in access to and control over resources related to energy and energy
services. The project formulation should then identify potential benefits and
risks of the proposed interventions to women and men and formulate strategies to
mitigate risks. Women’s and men’s interests and priorities regarding proposed
technology options and design features should be captured, as well as
anticipated benefits. The project formulation should also determine, for both
women and men: who is likely to make decisions about technology options; who
will be involved in maintenance/ repair and what training will be necessary; who
controls relevant resources; and who has the willingness and ability to
contribute labor, material, or money to the project. Finally, the formulation
should consider how project design will address external constraints in
policies, institutions, and processes. The thirds step of the project
formulation consists in creating management structures that involve women and
men on an equal footing. Implementing organizations should have capacity for
gender analysis and gender responsive programming. Project formulation should
include gender assessments of key project actors and where necessary, provide
briefings and/ or offer training on gender and energy issues. Finally, the
project formulation should identify specific project objectives related to
gender and set gender issues out clearly in the logical framework. This step
involves identifying the activities required to ensure attention to gender
equality; for example, how to reduce gender gaps. Project formulation should
also ensure the development of a budget for gender related analysis, expertise,
training, and activities, and ensure that responsibilities and expectations
concerning gender aspects are clearly indicated in project documents,
agreements, and contracts. Finally, the project formulation should develop
gender and sex-disaggregated project indicators, with participation from women
and men (see Box XX for examples, based on the Climate Investment Funds Gender-
Sensitive indicators indicators). Box XX: Examples of Gender-Sensitive
Indicators Example of Output / Outcome / Impact Results Sample of Output Gender-
Sensitive Indicators Sample of Outcome Gender-Sensitive Indicators Sample of
Impact Gender-Sensitive Indicators Output: Increased number of household
connections to renewable energy grids, mini-grids, or access to renewable energy
technology Outcome: Increased access to clean energy / increased supply of
energy Impact: Reduced energy poverty and increased energy security • Number and
percentage of participants attending participatory planning and consultation
meetings, disaggregated by sex • Number of households receiving financing for
renewable energy connection, disaggregated by sex of head of household • Number
of households connected to renewable energy technology, disaggregated by sex of
head of household • Number and percentage of households with subsidized
electricity connections for renewable energy technologies (disaggregated by sex
of head of household; socioeconomic group) • Number of households and
individuals (disaggregated by sex) with improved access to and primary use of
renewable energy sources • Number of people starting/expanding other enterprise
due to adoption of renewable energy technology, disaggregated by sex • % of
women energy users reporting improved change in access to energy services,
compared to men • Perceived change in access by women to time-saving, renewable
energy technologies • Perceived satisfaction of user, disaggregated by sex, with
electricity services or renewable energy technologies • Renewable energy users
consider themselves better off now in terms of increased access and control over
income than before adopting the renewable energy technology, disaggregated by
sex • Renewable energy users consider themselves better off now in terms of
decision-making power in the household than before adopting the RE technology,
disaggregated by sex • Renewable energy users consider themselves better off now
in terms of labor/time use, e.g. time spent on unpaid domestic and care work and
collection of biomass, than before adopting the renewable energy technology,
disaggregated by sex • Percentage change in expenditure on purchasing fuel for
household energy needs by women • Evidence of users’ satisfaction with
compensation, transitional support, special assistance, and resettlement,
disaggregated by sex. [Tool XX] Gender & Energy Indicators - Additional sources
--  <a href="https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/2022-12/Power-Africa-
Gender-Energy-Indicator-Catalog-Dec22.pdf">Power Africa – USAID</a>: Indicators
to measure the impact of gender interventions organized around seven
opportunities for interventions: --        Increase Women’s Participation in the
Workforce --      Increase Women’s Participation in Leadership Roles --
Increase Women’s Access to Finance --   Develop Gender Informed Policies --
Mitigate Gender Based Violence --       Increase Women’s Access to Energy --
Mobilize Capital with a Gender Lens --  <a href="https://climatepromise.undp.org
/sites/default/files/research_report_document/undp-ndcsp-gender-
indicators-2020.pdf">Gender Responsive Indicators - UNDP</a>: A guide for
connecting the interlinked processes of climate change and gender equality, by
using NDCs as a platform. The guide includes examples for energy programming. --
<a href="https://www.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/2022-
12/Gender%20Analysis%20Guidance_Energy%20Infrastracture.pdf">Gender analysis in
technical areas: Energy Infrastructure – UN WOMEN</a>: Guidance Note for gender
mainstreaming in energy infrastructure. The report provides a ‘Quick Guide to
Gender Issues in Energy Infrastructure’, presents planning strategies for gender
analysis, discusses data collection and analysis mechanisms, explains how to use
the results of gender analysis in energy infrastructure policy, and include a
case study of gender analysis in the energy infrastructure sector. --   <a
href="https://www.thegef.org/sites/default/files/documents/UNIDO-
Gender_Indicator_Framework_for_Energy_and_Climate_Change.pdf">UNIDOGENDER</a>:
Energy and climate change indicator framework for monitoring gender-related
impacts Project Implementation To ensure that the implementation phase is
gender-responsive, requires 4 key steps. First, the project implementation
should include Gender Knowledge in Terms of Reference. This point makes the
suggestion that project staff members' terms of reference (ToR) should contain
particular gender-related competencies and responsibilities. This implies that
employees are expected to know about gender issues pertinent to the project's
domain from the beginning or to acquire it. They ought to understand the
differentiated effects that project activities could have on men and women while
taking social, cultural, and economic aspects into account. This guarantees that
gender concerns are not an afterthought but rather a fundamental part of the
project planning process. Second, the project should track Disbursements for
Equality of Outcome. Tracking project disbursements in a proactive manner
emphasizes the necessity of ongoing supervision to guarantee that funds are
allocated in ways that advance equitable benefits for men and women. This
entails examining the distribution and use of financial resources to determine
whether they are reaching and helping all intended recipients equally,
regardless of gender. It also recommends modifying interventions in case they
are discovered to be unfair in order to guarantee that men and women can equally
benefit from the project. Third, gender-responsive project implementation
requires involving Women's Groups in Data Collection and Interpretation. It is
critical to include NGOs and women's groups in both data collection and
interpretation. The inclusion of women's perspectives and experiences in the
assessment of project outcomes is guaranteed by this participatory approach.
Women's organizations can offer perspectives on project actions that impact
women, which other people might miss. Their participation can also guarantee
that gender-responsive data collection techniques are used, and that gender
dynamics are taken into consideration when interpreting the results. The final
step of gender-responsive project implementation consists of establishing
partnership. Collaborations with diverse stakeholders, including local NGOs,
women's groups, community leaders, government agencies, and international
organizations with gender equality expertise, are the basis of partnerships for
gender equality and social inclusion. Exchanging information and building
partnerships with the national ministries of women's affairs and with gender
focal points of relevant institutions (i.e. ministry of energy, trade or labor,
municipalities) also result effective strategies. These collaborations can
expand the scope and efficacy of gender equality programs by bringing in a
variety of resources, expertise, and experiences. Additionally, they guarantee
the integration of gender equality considerations across various sectors and
intervention levels. Project Evaluation and Monitoring In the monitoring phase,
gender-disaggregated data and gender indicators set in the planning phase help
understand the implementation status of the activities, including the
participation rates of women and men, and assess if the expected results are
being achieved. If unexpected gender issues have been identified during the
monitoring, effective solutions should be formulated, assessed on the
compatibility with the project scope and progress, and added in the project as
new activities. Where the situation allows, it is desirable to revise project
plans accordingly. In the evaluation part, project achievements, implementation
process, outcomes, and impacts should be assessed with a gender perspective,
while evaluating the project in accordance with a prescribed project evaluation
framework (ex-post evaluation) and evaluation methodology (OEAC DAC six
evaluation criteria). When identifying the outcomes and impacts, attention needs
to be paid to signs of emerging outcomes and impacts as well as already achieved
outcomes and impacts. If there is difference in benefits received by women and
men, details of the difference and its causes should be analyzed. Monitoring and
evaluation can be carried out using participatory approaches. Staff carrying out
evaluations should have gender expertise and documentation should be assessed to
ensure that it covers all relevant gender issues. This stage will answer the
question as to whether gender objectives are being/been met. The monitoring and
evaluation stage needs to make sure that program and project evaluations
comprehensively report on gender activities and goals, relying on gender and
sex-disaggregated data (see Box XX ). Final reports should systematically
identify gender gaps and highlight gender-related project successes. Similarly,
the terms of reference for evaluators mandate gender expertise and experience.
Evaluators should be briefed on relevant gender issues and provided with
documentation. The evaluation should consider project outcomes/results
concerning differences in needs and priorities for women and men. This
assessment also needs to incorporate the views of participants and end users,
encompassing both genders. Project success should be determined based on
parameters outlined in monitoring reports, which capture information on gender-
related changes, including the impact of interventions on women's workload, time
use, access and control of income and resources, decision-making, modifications
in reproductive roles, and expressed aspirations of both women and men.
Evaluators should actively seek input from both women and men, analyzing
differences and similarities. It is worth noting that a feedback mechanism
within the project allows implementers to make course corrections. In this
regard, both women and men should have an equal ability to influence any
required corrective changes effectively. BOX XX [Definition] - Gender indicators
/ Sex-disaggregated indicators Sex-disaggregated indicators: Data that is cross-
classified by sex, presenting information separately for men and women, boys and
girls. When data is not disaggregated by sex, it is more difficult to identify
real and potential inequalities. Sex-disaggregated data is necessary for
effective gender analysis. However, this data is typically collected and
analyzed based on two biological categories, males and females, overlooking
wider gender identities, or gender roles, norms and relations. Gender
indicators: Criteria used to assess gender-related change in a condition and to
measure progress over time toward gender equality. Indicators used can be
quantitative (data, facts, numbers) and qualitative (opinions, feelings,
perceptions, experiences). Impact Assessment During the impact assessment phase,
a comprehensive evaluation will be undertaken to discern the tangible effects of
the project on both women and men through four criteria: --        Relevance of
gender issues to project objectives and whether gender was adequately
mainstreamed in project design and implementation. --        Effectiveness of
gender action plan and gender-related outcomes, outputs, targets, and indicators
--    Efficiency of project’s resource allocation (both human and financial) for
gender action plan implementation and monitoring; and --     Likely
sustainability of project outcomes on gender equality and women’s empowerment
based on both quantitative data and qualitative impact assessments. This
examination aims to elucidate how the project has influenced various aspects of
their lives, encompassing roles, opportunities, and overall experiences. The
assessment will delve into specific outcomes, shedding light on any disparities
or positive changes in gender dynamics resulting from the project's
implementation. Simultaneously, the ex-post evaluation will meticulously examine
whether it successfully identifies and articulates "lessons learned" pertaining
to the integration of a gender perspective within the realm of energy
initiatives. This involves a critical analysis of the project's approach to
gender considerations, identifying best practices and potential areas for
improvement. Insights gained from this evaluation will not only contribute to a
nuanced understanding of the project's impact on gender dynamics but also
provide valuable guidance for future endeavors in integrating a gender
perspective into energy-related initiatives. 3)    Integrating gender equality
in energy policies and frameworks. In order to draft gender-responsive energy
policies, it is necessary to ensure that the principles of gender mainstreaming
are applied to the process. This means, it is based on data and reflections from
sectoral gender analysis, it is participatory by nature -creating spaces for
women's voices, needs and aspirations to be identified- recognizing gender
activities, responsible parties and budget for their implementation and use of
gender and sex-disaggregated indicators. Gender-responsive energy policies
should identify women as a distinct target group. This mean to clearly outline
policy objectives to include women, alongside other marginalized groups like
youth and people with disabilities. They should also perform a gender analysis
to identify gaps and priorities. This gender analysis should be incorporated
into policy development to address barriers hindering women's effective energy
access, such as cultural norms and power imbalances. Sex-disaggregated data
should be collected and integrated throughout the policy document to highlight
disparities and inform targeted interventions, such as time spent on energy-
related tasks and participation rates in the energy sector. It is important to
acknowledge women beyond vulnerabilities. This means to recognize women as
active stakeholders and participants in the energy sector, moving beyond
portraying them solely as vulnerable beneficiaries. Gender-responsive energy
policies should prioritize efforts to boost women's participation in the energy
sector, promote their interest in energy technologies, and tailor energy
solutions to their specific needs. This strategy will contribute to addressing
gender equality in policy topics and priority areas. Moreover, these strategies
should recognize the diverse needs of women in different settings and ensure
policy supports a range of clean cooking technologies and thermal energy
options. Policies should also incentivize the private sector to target
marginalized communities, including women, through schemes like results-based
finance and affirmative actions. These policies should particularly contribute
to support safety nets for low-income women. Subsidies and support mechanisms
should be designed targeting households headed by women to ensure equitable
access to energy services. Finally, energy policies and frameworks should be
developed to address gender responsiveness in energy sector institutions.
Provisions could be included in the policy to strengthen energy institutions'
capacity to promote gender equality internally and in service delivery, such as
through gender quotas, professional growth opportunities, supportive work
environments for women, and measures to encourage girls to join the sector
(i.e., STEM education for girls) (See Box XX for further resources). BOX XX:
Further Resources Gender and Energy for Sustainable Development: A Toolkit and
Resource Guide This toolkit and resource guide has been produced jointly by the
Sustainable Energy Programme of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
and ENERGIA, the International Network on Gender and Sustainable Energy. It is
designed to help planners and practitioners integrate gender and energy
considerations into development programmes, including those focusing on energy
improvements as well as other types of development programmes. Mainstreaming
Gender in Mitigation and Technology This capacity-building package aims to
assist policymakers and practitioners in effectively integrating gender into
climate initiatives, equipping them with tools to promote gender equality in
climate change policies and programs. UNDP collaborates with governments
globally to integrate gender equality into climate dialogues and finance
structures. At the local level, UNDP empowers women as change agents in climate
adaptation efforts. The package aims to raise awareness, encourage gender
mainstreaming across all levels, provide tools for implementation, and offer
practical examples from UNDP's work in Bhutan and Cambodia. Gender and Climate
Change. Capacity development series, Africa, Training Module 3 “Gender and
energy” This training module on gender and energy is developed by UNDP in
collaboration with the Global Gender and Climate Alliance (GGCA) and supported
by the Governments of Finland and Denmark. This module aims to enhance
understanding of the relationship between climate change, energy, and gender. It
also seeks to underscore the gender-related barriers in the energy sector that
contribute to women's poverty and health risks. Additionally, it aims to equipe
learners with strategies to address these barriers, promoting gender equality
and ensuring energy security. 3)  Addressing Energy Inequalities Among
Marginalized Communities The concepts of Marginalization and Social Exclusion
shed light on the systemic barriers hindering the full integration of
individuals or groups into society. Marginalization encompasses the experiences
of those pushed to the sidelines by social systems, often overlooked in
traditional poverty analyses. In contrast to typical poverty frameworks focused
solely on economic scarcity, Social Exclusion addresses the broader spectrum of
inequalities within communities. It acts as a crucial link between poverty, with
its emphasis on material insufficiency, and inequality, which probes the uneven
distribution of resources and opportunities. Thus, Social Exclusion accentuates
the glaring disparities in deprivation experienced by marginalized populations.
Throughout history, economic theories have predominantly espoused resource-based
paradigms of “disadvantage”, focusing on individual or household units. Despite
the evolving understanding of poverty encompassing multiple dimensions such as
education, health, and dignity, economic factors persist as central. This has
perpetuated a "vertical" model of inequality, hierarchically ranking individuals
or households based on economic standing, evident in measures like the Gini
coefficient. Conversely, sociologists have directed attention towards identity-
based forms of marginalization, spotlighting how societal perceptions and
cultural norms devalue specific groups based on their identities. This
"horizontal" model of inequality transcends economic strata, emphasizing varying
levels of access to resources and opportunities based on identity. Yet, Social
Exclusion extends beyond these dimensions to encompass the spatial factor—a
dimension often overlooked. Spatial disadvantage manifests through the physical
isolation of certain communities, hindering their engagement in broader socio-
economic activities. Whether due to geographical remoteness or the segregation
of urban areas rife with violence and poverty, spatial disadvantage compounds
the challenges faced by marginalized groups. This spatial dimension (where you
are/live) intertwines with economic deprivation (what you have) and identity-
based discrimination (who you are), as marginalized communities frequently
reside in physically deprived locations. Thus, while a two-dimensional model of
Social Exclusion suffices in some contexts—focusing on deprivation and
discrimination—others necessitate a three-dimensional approach that incorporates
spatial factors to fully grasp the intricacies of exclusion and its
repercussions on communities. This chapter delves into communities historically
subjected to various forms and degrees of marginalization and social exclusion.
Adopting an intersectional perspective, it explores the experiences of specific
marginalized communities that are particularly relevant to energy-related
development projects and initiatives. It dissects the unique barriers that
hinder their access to energy resources. Additionally, the chapter examines the
specific impacts and considerations relevant to energy transition projects
within these contexts. It acknowledges the significance of nurturing energy
resilience rooted in the knowledge and experiences of these communities. This
chapter does not aim to provide an exhaustive list of all marginalized
communities, but rather serves as an illustration of how diverse communities may
possess distinct needs, challenges, and opportunities in the face of inequality,
and how these contexts intersect with the energy system. Moreover, it is crucial
to recognize that no community is homogeneous. As previously discussed, an
intersectional approach facilitates understanding of how these experiences
overlap and intersect. 1)      The Energy inequalities in marginalized
Communities Inequality can have a significant impact on access to affordable and
clean energy. Lack of access to energy is a major problem for many low-income
households and marginalized communities. In these communities, residents mostly
do not have access to grid-based electricity and need to rely on expensive and
polluting energy sources such as kerosene or diesel generators. Additionally,
many low-income households may not be able to afford the costs associated with
connecting to the grid or upgrading their homes to use clean energy sources.
Furthermore, marginalized communities may be more affected by the negative
impacts of fossil fuels because they often live in more polluted areas or are
more vulnerable to the effects of climate change. For example, low-income
communities may be more likely to live near factories or power plants that burn
fossil fuels, which can worsen air quality. In addition, indigenous communities
may rely on the land and natural resources for their livelihoods, which the
negative impacts of fossil fuels can damage. The upfront costs of transitioning
to a low-carbon energy system can also be a barrier for other reasons. For
example, some communities may not have the infrastructure needed to support
clean energy technologies, such as roads or power lines. Others may face
regulatory or policy barriers that make it hard to adopt clean energy solutions.
To address these challenges and ensure that everyone can benefit from a low-
carbon energy system, it is essential to implement policies and initiatives that
support the transition to clean energy. This may involve providing financial
assistance or subsidies to marginalized communities, creating incentives for
adopting clean energy technologies or investing in infrastructure to support the
deployment of clean energy solutions. 1)        Remote/Rural Communities Access
to reliable, efficient, and modern amenities is indispensable for both urban and
rural populations. Nonetheless, a significant disparity persists in access to
electricity, disproportionately affecting rural communities in low-income and
developing countries. According to the 2023 edition of the Tracking SDG7 report,
while 98% of urban residents have access to electricity, only 85% of their rural
counterparts do. This gap widens in the least developed countries, where the
average access rate was a mere 56% in 2021, leaving approximately 481 million
people without electricity out of a global total of 675 million. Without
intervention, projections suggest that by 2030, between 560 million to 660
million people in sub-Saharan Africa and 70 million people in developing Asia
will still lack access to electricity, reflecting the trend of population growth
in these regions. Recent electrification efforts in rural areas of these regions
indicate that most of these individuals will likely reside in rural settings.
For instance, in sub-Saharan Africa, the rate of rural electrification was
outpaced by population growth between 2019 and 2021. Similarly, in Eastern and
Southeastern Asia, the annual growth in the number of connected rural dwellers
slowed, possibly due to a steady decline in the overall rural population (IEA et
al., 2023). The report also highlights disparities in access to clean cooking
fuels and technologies, reflecting similar trends to those seen in electricity
access. In urban areas, the percentage of people with access to clean cooking
fuels and technologies saw only a slight increase over the past decade, rising
from 82 percent in 2010 to 86 percent in 2021. Conversely, in rural areas,
access increased more significantly, climbing from 31 percent to 51 percent over
the same period. Between 2000 and 2010, the disparity in access to clean cooking
between urban and rural areas was approximately 50 percentage points. However,
by 2021, this gap had narrowed to 35 percentage points, with expectations of
further reduction to 23 percentage points by 2030 if current trends persist.
Universal energy access entails extending electricity to communities worldwide,
including remote areas like high mountains and islands. This encompasses
communities with limited prospects for grid extension, such as those displaced
by conflict or Indigenous and tribal groups with minimal exposure to modern
energy options. Highlighted as a top priority recommendation by the UN's High-
Level Dialogue on Energy, addressing the last mile of energy access is
paramount. This necessitates significant improvements in electricity access
rates, reaching the most remote, poorest, and most vulnerable populations,
including those affected by displacement. Furthermore, solutions for extending
access must be context-sensitive to cater to the specific needs and
circumstances of vulnerable populations. Remote communities are typically
characterized not just by their geographical isolation, but also by factors such
as sparse populations, limited access to traditional energy sources,
insufficient infrastructure, minimal economic activity, physical barriers to
accessibility, and considerable distances from external markets. However, taking
an intersectional approach is crucial to recognizing that a variety of identity
groups and human communities may share this sense of remoteness. This
encompasses not only Indigenous and peasant communities but also mountain
populations, small island populations, and even displaced individuals residing
in refugee settlements, many of whom may also belong to Indigenous or peasant
groups. Understanding and addressing the unique challenges faced by these
diverse communities is essential for achieving universal energy access,
addressing inequalities in energy transition, and acknowledging the specific
impacts and benefits that different remote communities may encounter within the
energy system in which they are embedded. By considering the intersecting
factors of geography, culture, and socio-economic status, comprehensive
strategies can be developed to ensure equitable and sustainable energy provision
for all remote communities. Recent estimates indicate that Indigenous peoples
exert control over approximately 30% of the Earth's land surface, while
comparable figures for peasant land remain unavailable. A study assessing the
extent and core sustainability issues tied to the intersection of these
territories with critical minerals essential for energy transitions reveals a
significant finding: over half of the resource base for Critical Minerals is
situated on or near lands belonging to Indigenous and peasant communities. The
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP) and the
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants and Other People Working in
Rural Areas (UNDROP) seek to safeguard land-connected groups, predominantly
found in the least industrialized regions or where land plays a pivotal role in
upholding universal human rights. These groups, often marginalized or
discriminated against, maintain strong ties to their land, territory, and
surrounding natural resources, possessing distinct social, cultural, and
political systems, as well as language. Both UNDRIP and UNDROP affirm these
groups' right to determine crucial development decisions regarding their lands
and territories. However, the push for increased extraction of critical minerals
to propel the energy transition poses a significant challenge to global social
and environmental sustainability. Processes of self-determination among
Indigenous peoples typically prioritize cultural and ecological values over
indiscriminate industrial development. With a surge in global demand for
critical minerals, these rights-holding groups face unprecedented pressure. The
lands of Indigenous peoples and peasants find themselves at the forefront of
competing sustainability objectives, where the precise location and potential
social and environmental trade-offs linked to resource development have yet to
be clearly defined. Furthermore, the rights of indigenous peoples to their
lands, territories, and resources often face limitations or lack recognition.
Even in cases where legal frameworks exist to support these rights,
implementation is frequently hindered or inconsistent. Conflicts arise from
various sources, including resource extraction, logging, allocation of land for
renewable energy sources and agribusiness, as well as disputes between
indigenous pastoralists, nomadic herders, and farmers over shrinking grazing
lands exacerbated by warfare and the impacts of climate change. Additionally,
conflicts may arise from the establishment of conservation areas. Moreover, the
principle and significance of free, prior, and informed consent are often
disregarded by both governments and the private sector, perpetuating ongoing
challenges and tensions. 1)       Remote Communities across Regions Mountain
populations In 2015, an estimated 1.050 billion individuals inhabited mountain
areas as defined by the World Conservation Monitoring Center (WCMC). Over the
period from 1975 to 2015, the proportion of mountain populations to the global
population remained steady at 14%. Population densities vary, with higher
densities at lower altitudes and lower densities at higher altitudes.
Approximately one-third of mountain populations reside in cities, another third
in towns and semi-dense areas, and the remaining third in rural settings.
Regional trends indicate increasing population growth in the mountain ranges of
western and southern Asia, stable or decreasing growth in eastern Asia and
Europe, and moderate population growth with high urbanization in Latin American
ranges. Energy requirements in these settlements primarily revolve around
cooking, space heating, and water heating. The Hindu Kush Himalaya (HKH) region
exemplifies these patterns, relying heavily on biomass due to its abundance,
while liquified petroleum gas (LPG) is utilized for small-scale industrial
processes and commercial enterprises. Agriculture in Nepal, for instance,
accounts for 9.9% of total petroleum product consumption and 2.2% of total
electricity consumption, mainly for tillage, irrigation, and threshing.
Decentralized renewable energy (DRE) solutions offer potential for mechanizing
farming processes, enhancing productivity, and fostering stronger market
connections, resulting in increased earnings. Small Islands Populations Small
island developing states (SIDS) are a group of 57 island nations with a combined
population of approximately 65 million. These populations, due to their remote
geographical locations, face distinct social, economic, and environmental
challenges. SIDS nations are increasingly transitioning to renewable energy
sources, both for utility-scale electricity access and decentralized off-grid
systems. Many SIDS plan to incorporate renewable energy sources into their
primary fuel mix at the utility scale, driven by factors such as the high costs
of electricity production using imported fuels, the abundant potential of
renewable energy resources, and the recognized environmental and societal
benefits. Additionally, political support and strategic planning aim to develop
sustainable energy supplies in alignment with international climate change
mitigation efforts, including nationally determined contributions. For instance,
in Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands, off-grid solutions utilizing
renewable energy sources are pivotal for connecting homes in remote islands. In
Papua New Guinea, with its 600 small islands, the National Electricity Authority
aims to provide electricity access to 70% of households by 2030 and 100% by
2050, supported by the World Bank's data collection efforts and IRENA's
assistance in greenhouse gas emissions calculations. Various models of off-grid
implementation, including public-private partnerships and local government
initiatives, are being pursued to meet these targets. Moreover, departments such
as health and fisheries, reliant on energy for service delivery, manage small
renewable energy power plants. A crucial consideration in providing energy
access to small islands and their communities is the diversity of cultures and
languages, which influences demand profiles and livelihoods. Understanding these
nuances is essential for designing DRE projects tailored to specific community
needs. These examples underscore the diverse necessities and considerations
inherent in energy projects targeting remote communities. Recognizing the
multiplicity of contexts, it's imperative to move away from "one size fits all"
approaches and adopt intersectional, participatory, and information-accessible
processes for an equitable energy system transformation. 2)     Indigenous
Peoples To achieve the goals of the Paris Agreement and avoid a climate crisis,
the transition to sustainable energy needs to be accelerated and effective. More
importantly, the energy transition needs to be just to ensure that sustainable
energy is accessible for everyone. A just energy transition requires that all
vulnerable and marginalized groups are given equitable access to the
opportunities and shared benefits of sustainable energy. Indigenous peoples are
inheritors and practitioners of unique cultures, they hold ancestral ties to
their lands and ways of relating to people and the environment. They retain
social, cultural, economic and political characteristics that differ from those
of the dominant societies in which they live. Despite their cultural
differences, Indigenous Peoples from around the world share common problems
related to the protection of their rights as distinct peoples. Through history,
the rights of Indigenous Peoples have been constantly violeted and they have
sought regonition of their identities, way of life and their right to
traditional lands, territories and natural ressources for years. Today,
Indigenous Peoples are amont the most disadvantage and vulnerable groups of
people in the world Currently, it is estimated that there are over 476
million indigenous people living in 90 countries across the world, accounting
for 6.2 per cent of the global population. Of those, 5,000 are distinct
indigenous groups. Indigenous Peoples are important actors in the development of
sustainable energy projects and putting Indigenous Peoples at the centre of
decision making on sustainable energy projects that affect them is critical for
an effective achievement of SDG 7. The United Nations recognizes that concrete
and special measures are needed to protect the rights and distinct cultures and
way of life of Indigenous Peoples. The United Nations Declaration on the Rights
of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP) was adopted on 13 September 2007. The Declaration
is the most comprehensive international instrument on the rights of Indigenous
Peoples and stablishes a universal framework of minimum standards for the
survival, dignity, and well-being Indigenous Peoples. In light of the
international necessity to protect the rights of Indigenous Peoples, the United
Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues (UNPFII) was established on 28 July
2000 with the with the mandate to deal with indigenous issues related to
economic and social development, culture, the environment, education, health and
human rights. In relation to the energy transition, the Permanent Forum has
recognized that the increased development of renewable energy projects related
to green technology has led, at times, to violations of Indigenous People’s
rights, including mineral extraction and the building of hydroelectric dams and
other largescale infrastructure without the free, prior and informed consent of
Indigenous Peoples. As a result, the Permanent Forum has recognized that it is
essential that Member States can provide the necessary measures to ensure that
Indigenous Peoples’ own Free, Prior and Informed Consent protocols are followed
in the development of renewable energy projects. Through the right to Free,
Prior and Informed Consent, Indigenous Peoples have the right to collectively
decide to give or withhold consent to any project that can affect their lands,
natural resources, cultural integrity, and territories. Globally, Indigenous
Peoples’ territories comprise over 70% of the world’s protected biodiversity,
because of this, Indigenous Peoples have to defend their natural environments,
traditional ways of life and territories against industrial projects. In this
context, most violations against their human rights occur while defending their
territories from extractive industry projects. Indigenous Peoples oppose land
grabbing, natural resource extraction and deforestation on their lands and
territories, as these endanger their traditional livelihoods and the
environment. The impact of traditional energy sources based on burning of fossil
fuels have resulted in environmental and economic impacts that affect the
quality of life of Indigenous communities around the globe. Multiple Indigenous
communities are located close to fossil fuel extraction sites and coal-fired
power plants, resulting in multiple adverse impacts to their well-being, such as
air pollution, pipeline leaks that affect the quality of water and food sources
and fossil fuel pollution associated to health adverse effects, such as asthma,
birth complications, cancer, respiratory disease, heart conditions, and
premature mortality. Large scale renewable energy projects also pose significant
risks to the wellbeing of Indigenous Peoples, as some projects have led to land-
grabbing and forced displacement, the destruction of local lands and sacred
sites as well as further human rights abuses. An increased access to sustainable
energy sources can help Indigenous communities overcome economic, social and
environmental challenges but the transition to low-carbon economies has to be
just in order to avoid human rights abuses and harmful impacts to the well-being
of Indigenous populations. The race to achieve a transition to sustainable
energies has substantially increased the demand for the extraction of critical
minerals, such as copper, nickel, and lithium, that are required for the
development of technologies for wind turbines, solar panels, and batteries for
electric vehicles. The increased global demand for these critical minerals
imposes further risks to Indigenous Peoples lands. From over 5,097 mining
projects involving about 30 minerals, over 54% of mineral extraction projects
are on or near Indigenous Peoples territories. This often the case in Latin
America, which is home to between 42 and 53 million Indigenous
Peoples and significant reserves of raw materials for the energy transition. The
International Energy Agency projects that among these minerals, lithium demand
for electric vehicle batteries is projected to increase 40 times by 2040, with
85% of lithium reserves and resources overlapping with Indigenous Peoples lands.
Similarly, the demand for nickel and manganese is projected to grow 20-25 times
and 75% of manganese and 57% of nickel reserves and resources also overlap with
Indigenous Peoples lands. As multiple renewable energy projects are found on
Indigenous Peoples territories, it is essential that developers work alongside
local governments and Indigenous communities to avoid potential conflicts
regarding land-use, displacement, and human rights violations. If done right,
increased access to renewable energies offers Indigenous communities the
opportunity of improving their well-being with social, economic, and
environmental benefits. Sustainable energy governance should support the
organisations of Indigenous communities to increase to sustainable energy while
respecting the traditional land-use of Indigenous communities. The territories
and natural resources of Indigenous Peoples communities are managed through
communal structures and the territories are protected to maintain biodiversity
and ensure the protection of local ecosystems, that serve as the basis of
Indigenous economic systems. To successfully implement renewable energy
projects, it becomes essential that developers can embrace the pluralism of
Indigenous communities and adapt its implementation to local circumstances. It
is therefore essential that development of renewable projects can include a
thorough study of the land to know historical processes that have shaped the
land. This knowledge would allow for a profound understanding of historical and
cultural processes that guide land use processes in Indigenous populations and
would allow for a better implementation of renewable energy projects alongside
Indigenous communities. It is important that renewable energy projects can
consider the communal way of living of Indigenous population and continue to
foster the principles of communal structures. The use of ‘‘pluriversal
technologies” can help sustainable energy projects to be successful while
contributing to the sustainable development of Indigenous populations. This
notion emphasises the use for technologies that can be operated through
decentralised communal structures that preserve and enhance local socio-cultural
practices of Indigenous Peoples, particularly important is the need for
participatory design, defined as the direct involvement of people in the co
design of the technologies they use. In this context, incorporating the skills
and ancient knowledge of Indigenous Peoples can be beneficial for the successful
implementation of sustainable energy projects. Equally important is the co-
production of renewable energies, which can lead to decent jobs and economic
opportunities for Indigenous Populations. It is therefore essential that the
technologies implemented can be locally repaired and disassembled and that local
populations of Indigenous communities are provided with the skills, tools and
knowledge required to autonomously use and operate them. In terms of co-
ownership, local ownership can lead to a better distribution of the economic
benefits that new technologies bring about and can help establish, preserve, or
reinforce local democratic economic structures. The decentralised control of
these technologies is also key to ensuring their accessibility and
affordability. 3) Fragile and Conflict contexts Major crises across the globe,
spanning from Afghanistan to Haiti, Ukraine, Yemen, and beyond, have inflicted
significant, sometimes generational setbacks to development progress, leaving
people in these contexts facing an increasingly uncertain future. Approximately
15 percent of the world’s total population – roughly 1.2 billion people – reside
in conflict-affected areas, while disaster losses have sharply risen, impacting
4.2 billion individuals over the past two decades. Notably, the recent surge in
global food and energy prices catalyzed by the war in Ukraine alone has pushed
71 million people in the developing world into poverty. By the end of 2022, the
number of people forced to flee conflict, violence, human rights violations, and
persecution exceeded 108 million, with an estimated 41 percent being children.
Children, in particular, endure profound damage and disruption to their lives
and development due to conflict, suffering physical and sexual violence, unmet
basic needs, lack of education access, and widespread mental health issues
stemming from trauma. In the face of these formidable challenges, energy
resilience is a pivotal factor for development, crucial for supporting
vulnerable populations in recovering from shocks and crises. There are several
critical global trends to consider when devising policies to bolster energy
resilience in fragile contexts: -- Limited access to energy can significantly
impact the safety and security of displaced individuals, particularly women and
children, as seen in refugee camps where insufficient lighting and connectivity
jeopardize safety and hinder opportunities for socialization, learning, and
self-reliance. --        Inadequate access to clean cooking resources also
imposes a negative toll on local ecosystems, leading to enduring environmental
degradation due to the widespread cutting of trees for firewood. --    High
financial and environmental costs accompany the provision of energy needs to
communities and support facilities, often marked by inefficient appliances,
inadequate monitoring of energy consumption, and insufficient incentives for
energy efficiency or transitioning to renewable energy. --   Displaced
communities, among the world's poorest and most vulnerable, face substantial
barriers in accessing energy, exacerbating conflicts and hindering the
fulfillment of basic needs. --    The ability of communities to cope with and
swiftly recover from crises hinges on their capacity to regain sustainable
energy access, crucial for facilitating access to water, social services like
health and education, transportation, communication, and reviving livelihoods
and local economies. --      Sustainable energy access plays diverse roles in
crisis response, recovery, and stabilization phases, bolstering resilience by
integrating energy considerations into the onset of crises and implementing
energy programming for immediate responses, including short-term supply options
like mobile renewable energy solutions and cooking fuels. Furthermore, the
impacts of the climate crisis are increasingly evident, characterized by rising
temperatures, exacerbated extreme weather events, and erratic rainfall patterns.
These phenomena amplify existing vulnerabilities, particularly among
marginalized communities, and pose existential threats such as rapid sea-level
rise in coastal regions. Urgent action is imperative to address the intersection
of insecurity and climate change, emphasizing the importance of governance,
security, and justice reforms to bolster climate adaptation and mitigation
efforts, including those related to energy access and sustainable energy
initiatives Furthermore, the effects of the climate crisis are becoming clearer.
This includes rising temperatures, more frequent and severe extreme weather
events, and unpredictable rainfall patterns. These changes are causing
biodiversity loss, disrupting food prices, and harming people's livelihoods.
They also worsen social and gender inequalities, often leading to large-scale
displacement. The rapid rise in sea levels along coastal areas is particularly
concerning, posing a threat to existence and raising questions about maritime
boundaries and national identity. While our understanding of climate change's
impacts on ecosystems, societies, institutions, and infrastructure continues to
grow, it's clear that it worsens existing weaknesses, especially for vulnerable
communities with limited coping abilities. For instance, in 2020, 12 out of the
20 countries least prepared for climate change were in conflict, resulting in
less financial support for climate-related issues in those nations.
Additionally, the link between insecurity and climate change underscores the
need to monitor how climate variability affects citizen security, particularly
in cities. Regions rich in mineral resources but plagued by inequality and
social conflict, especially regarding natural resources, highlight the urgent
need for a fair transition. The convergence of organized crime, climate-induced
migration, and biodiversity loss amplify existing vulnerabilities, particularly
among marginalized communities. Urgent action is imperative to address the
intersection of insecurity and climate change, emphasizing the importance of
governance, security, and justice reforms to bolster climate adaptation and
mitigation efforts, including those related to energy access and sustainable
energy initiatives. Aligned with the UNDP's definition of resilience, the UNDP
Sustainable Energy Hub (SEH) defines energy resilience in fragile contexts as
the ability of individuals, communities, and systems to withstand and recover
from shocks and stresses related to energy supply, demand, and access. This
aligns with the UNDP Strategic Plans definition of resilience: "strengthening
countries and institutions to prevent, mitigate and respond to crisis, conflict,
natural disasters, climate and social and economic shocks". UNDP's efforts in
energy resilience are geared towards supporting crisis response as well as long-
term objectives linked to the SDGs, national development, and poverty
eradication. It encompasses various factors crucial for human security and
social development, including the availability, affordability, and reliability
of energy services, along with the capacity of individuals and communities to
handle and adapt to energy-related challenges. Energy resilience, in essence,
refers to a community or society's ability to endure and recover from energy-
related shocks and disruptions, whether caused by natural disasters, conflicts,
or economic crises. In contexts marked by fragility and crises, social policies
can play a pivotal role in enhancing energy resilience. These policies ensure
that energy systems are accessible, affordable, and reliable while bolstering
the resilience of local communities and institutions. A fundamental social
dimension of energy resilience lies in accessibility, which entails ensuring
that all individuals and communities have equitable access to and benefit from
energy systems. Social policies are instrumental in bridging accessibility gaps
and fostering inclusive and accessible energy systems by specifically targeting
vulnerable and marginalized groups such as refugees, displaced persons, and low-
income households. For instance, in Jordan, the government has implemented the
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) to enhance the energy efficiency
of public buildings and promote the adoption of renewable energy sources. This
initiative has provided technical assistance, training, and financing to
facilitate the installation of solar panels and energy-efficient appliances in
schools, hospitals, and other public institutions. Consequently, the program has
bolstered energy access and affordability for vulnerable populations, including
refugees and low-income households. Another crucial social dimension of energy
resilience is affordability, ensuring that energy systems are economically
viable and accessible to all individuals and communities, irrespective of their
income or social standing. Social policies can address affordability disparities
by offering financial assistance, subsidies, and incentives to encourage the
uptake of renewable energy sources and energy-efficient technologies. For
example, Haiti has implemented the Energy for All program to promote access to
sustainable energy sources for low-income households and communities. Through
this initiative, financing and technical assistance have been provided to
support the installation of solar panels, energy-efficient appliances, and other
renewable energy solutions. Additionally, training and capacity building have
been conducted to promote sustainable energy practices, resulting in improved
energy access and affordability for vulnerable populations affected by events
like the 2010 earthquake. Beyond accessibility and affordability, social
policies can also fortify the resilience of local communities and institutions,
essential for enhancing energy resilience in crises and fragile contexts. By
offering training, capacity building, and technical assistance, social policies
empower local communities to withstand and recover from energy-related shocks
and disruptions. This includes promoting energy-efficient practices, developing
local renewable energy sources, and establishing community-based energy systems.
In Somalia, for instance, the UNDP has implemented the Sustainable Energy for
All project, focusing on promoting renewable energy sources and energy-efficient
practices in rural communities affected by conflict and displacement. Through
this initiative, training and capacity building have been provided to local
communities and institutions, while support has been extended for the
establishment of community-based energy systems such as solar-powered irrigation
systems and renewable energy-powered health clinics. Consequently, the project
has enhanced the energy resilience of local communities and contributed to the
sustainable development of the region. Energy access in humanitarian contexts In
humanitarian contexts, diesel generators are the primary source of electricity.
A recent study, drawing from data of just six global humanitarian agencies,
revealed an annual expenditure exceeding 100 million USD on fuel, leading to
emissions of 200,000 tons of CO2eq GHG emissions. The adoption of energy-
efficient appliances alone could potentially reduce consumption by up to 15%.
Establishing a streamlined process for energy transition in the humanitarian
sector, informed by data, technical expertise, and innovative financial
mechanisms, will catalyze public-private partnerships, and facilitate scalable
energy transition initiatives. --      102+ million people are forcibly
displaced from their homes in 2022. Communities displaced by war and disasters
are among the poorest and most vulnerable people in the world. --       94% of
displaced people in camps do not have access to electricity. --  81% of people
living in camps rely on firewood and charcoal for cooking. --     $10 billion
are needed to cover all refugee energy needs globally between 2022 and 2030.
UNDP's work in displacement settings involves partnering to deliver reliable and
affordable energy solutions to communities affected by conflict and crises,
addressing immediate basic needs while fostering long-term resilience and
sustainable development. Focusing on decentralized sustainable energy solutions,
UNDP aims to rebuild communities after crises, integrating these solutions into
long-term recovery plans and investments. In crisis contexts, UNDP's approach
extends beyond restoring energy access to combat poverty and inequality, meeting
basic household needs, powering essential services, fueling water systems for
agriculture and basic needs, and empowering micro, small and medium enterprises,
and supporting livelihoods for a dignified recovery. Recent efforts have also
prioritized enhancing energy resilience in critical sectors such as healthcare
during health crises like COVID-19 and Ebola outbreaks. Strategic upstream
advisory support to countries to mainstream sustainable energy solutions into
long term crisis recovery plans and investments, facilitating green recovery
opportunities post-war, disaster, or pandemic. This includes identifying avenues
for competitive energy markets, de-risking policy instruments, and accelerating
financing and private sector engagement in crisis-affected nations. Lack of
energy access poses a significant barrier to meeting basic needs in humanitarian
operations, affecting activities like cooking, heating, and healthcare. It is
essential to implement new funding and delivery models for energy access in
displacement settings, as donor funding is insufficient to tackle the challenge.
More innovative financing is needed to scale up solutions and attract investment
and participation from the private sector, who have traditionally viewed refugee
camps and informal settlements as risky and unprofitable settings. Refugee and
displacement settlements frequently lack infrastructure and are located in
remote areas, complicating the distribution of goods and fuel supply chains, and
increasing project implementation costs. Deploying decentralized renewable
energy systems presents an opportunity to address these challenges, although
additional factors such as the absence of implementation partners in the target
area(s) and the need for military escorts for transportation further escalate
costs. 4) Informal Settlements It is estimated that over 55 percent of the
world’s population live in urban spaces, representing over 4.3 billion people.
Some of the most pressing issues of urban spaces is the access to adequate
housing. It is estimated that in 2020, 1 in 4 urban inhabitants lived in
informal settlements and slum households without access to basic services such
as potable water, sanitation and energy. Globally, the number of people living
in slums and informal settlements has increased from 895 million in 2000 to over
1 billion in 2020, with 80 percent attributed to Eastern and South-Eastern Asia
(370 million), sub-Saharan Africa (238 million) and Central and Southern Asia
(227 million). According to UN Habitat, adequate housing must meet several
conditions such as providing a secure tenure, solid construction, safe
materials, accessible design, affordable pricing, cultural relevance and nearby
infrastructure and public services. “Slums” are defined as human settlements
that lack tenure security, need improved water supply or sanitation, suffer from
overcrowding and contain poor durability structures, while “Informality” refers
to some form of irregularity or illegality in construction or occupation while
not necessarily implying poor housing quality. Over the years, the share of
urban population living in slums and informal settlements has continued to
decline, but the absolute number is still on the rise. In fact, the world is
producing new slum dwellers faster than it can address existing slums and by
2030 an estimated 3 billion people will require adequate and affordable housing.
Sub-Saharan Africa is the region with the highest percentage of slum dwellers,
where more than half of the urban population live in slums. Further population
growth will increase the incidence of slums, particularly in Africa and Asia,
where a 1 percent increase in urban population will increase the incidence of
slums by 2.3 percent and 5.3 percent in Africa and Asia respectively. Some of
the top countries with the highest percentage of urban population living in
slums (from 90 to 60 percent) are Afghanistan, Angola, Benin, Central African
Republic, Chad, Democratic Republic of Congo, Ethiopia, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia,
Madagascar, Mauritania, Mozambique, Sao Tome and Principe, Somalia, South Sudan,
and Sudan. The causes of informal settlements are complex and arise from rapid
urbanisation, ineffective urban planning, rural-to-urban migration and refugee
flows, social inequalities, deregulated economies, poor housing policies and
forced evictions. Dysfunctional urban, land and housing policies, coupled with a
decrease in housing finance along with poverty can also contribute to the
increase of informal settlements. In Namibia, nearly 40 percent of the
population lives in informal settlements, often referred to as the ‘silver
houses’ due to the corrugated iron sheets used for the creation of slums.
Particularly, most of the informal settlers are internal migrants coming from
rural areas, including young people looking for better jobs, incomes, education
and other essential services. While the highest percentage of slums concentrate
in the developing world, it is important to be aware that although there are
similarities in terms of deprivation of basic services and poverty, the distinct
historic, geographic, and institutional contexts should be analysed for the
implementation of effective social policies. Historically rooted and systemic
inequalities based on social characteristics like age, gender, ethnicity, sexual
orientation, migration, and disabilities hamper the access to adequate housing.
There are historically rooted and systemic inequalities in access to adequate
housing on the basis of social characteristics like age, gender, ethnicity,
sexual orientation, migration, and disabilities. Women and gender diverse
persons have historically struggled with patriarchal property regimes and
assessments in sub-Saharan Africa found that just 12 percent of women owned land
individually compared to 31 percent of men. Children have been found to be one
of the most vulnerable groups living in slums. Estimates made by UN-Habitat
indicate that in 2020, over 350 to 500 million children lived in slum
households, with the majority living in Asia and Africa. Children living in
slums represent over one-third to half of the total slum population and children
are faced with multiple deprivations, including limited access to health,
sanitation, education, and other social services. To achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals, it is imperative that people living in informal settlements
and slums can be given the support they need to improve their well-being and
living conditions. In terms of energy access, there’s a required need for
adequate social policies that can transform the living conditions of slums.
Including the provision of energy for clean cooking, heating, and lighting which
related to the universal access to affordable, reliable, and modern energy
services of SDG 7. Some of the barriers that hinders efforts for adequate, safe,
and affordable housing and basic services involve the following: --    Lack of
Accurate and consistent data by national governments. In 2020, only 81 countries
from 193 members of the United Nations provided data on their respective
information on informal settlements and slum populations. --  Inadequate
financing mechanisms that have contributed to limited public investment to
develop affordable housing and basic infrastructure. --   Inadequate regulatory
frameworks including restrictive zoning and land-use regulations which have
contributed to excess housing demand and unaffordability. --  Low political
participation and exclusion have resulted in concentrated interests to have
disproportionate influence on local planning processes. --    Limited land
supply and insecure land tenure hinder development efforts of affordable housing
and property improvements as residents consider a big risk to make big
investments without the security of ownership. --  Poor Policy Integration of
housing into broader development and antipoverty policies can hamper progress on
both access to affordable housing and other related development goals. Access to
energy in urban settlements is generally higher in urban than rural regions, but
there is still an estimated 20 percent of the urban population that lacks access
to reliable energy. The energy access in informal settlements remains very
limited, as most residents in informal settlements do not have access to legal
grid electricity and rely on costly and polluting energy sources to cover basic
needs, such as kerosene, diesel, gas and biomass. Firewood and fossil fuels like
coal and gas are often used for cooking, resulting in a negative impact in both
the environment and the health of women who often develop the cooking tasks of
households. Because of the lack of energy in informal settlements, candles or
gasoline is commonly used of lighting, which increases the risk of fire hazards.
When it comes to informal settlements, the energy supply is often very limited,
unreliable, and expensive for residents. Generally, the access to electricity is
measured by the ratio of the number of residents connected to the grid, however,
this method does not reflect the complexity of the reality of people living in
informal settlements in terms of energy access. Some of the most common
challenges experienced by residents in informal settlements involve the
following: --  The lack of financial mechanisms to lower the price of energy for
informal settlements is an important barrier to energy access in these areas.
Energy suppliers can increase the price of installations to connect new users to
the grid, as these are often dependent on geographical locations and
environmental risks (flooding). As most people in informal settlements lives in
poverty it becomes increasingly difficult to cover such high prices. Likewise, a
demanding energy maintenance can lead to higher supply costs and increase the
monthly price of energy. --        Oftentimes, the illegal status of people
living in slum, the lack of tenure, and high residential turnover prevent long-
term contracts with national energy companies. --       The spatial
configuration of informal settlements is characterised by extremely narrow and
inaccessible roads. This creates further difficulties for energy providers to
access buildings and households to provide an adequate energy supply. For
instance, in Mozambique, the energy supply to households that are not accessible
by road is prohibited due security measures. --     There is a high occurrence
of blackouts that last hours, days or even weeks in informal settlements. --
Natural events (flooding or landslides) can further damage the existing energy
infrastructures in slums. --     Due to the lack of connection to legal energy
providers, there are illegal connections to energy provided by cartels. For
instance, in the settlement of Mathare, Kenya, an estimated 50% of electricity
connections were informal between 2017 and 2019. The illegal connections to
electricity in informal settlements require a good level of organizational
skills to sustain the operation of the illegal energy systems. When used for the
energy transition, these skills can be useful to provide continuous technical
support to renewable energy sources in informal settlements. Wrap- Up and Key
Lessons Learned Intersectionality Is Crucial for Understanding Energy
Disparities: Different social identities, such as gender, race, ethnicity,
economic status, and geographical location, intersect to create unique
experiences of advantage or disadvantage in accessing sustainable energy.
Acknowledging these intersections is essential for developing equitable energy
policies and programs. Gender Inequality Impedes Sustainable Energy Access:
Gender disparities significantly influence access to and control over energy
resources. Addressing these disparities is critical for ensuring that
sustainable energy solutions benefit everyone, particularly women, who are often
disproportionately affected by energy poverty. Empowering Women in the Energy
Sector Benefits the Broader Community: Empowering women in the energy sector
extends beyond individual benefits, positively impacting entire communities. It
enhances economic opportunities, family well-being, and leads to more
sustainable energy solutions that meet the community's needs. Recognizing women
as agents of change and supporting their empowerment in this sector can lead to
more sustainable and equitable energy outcomes. Integrated Development
Strategies Enhance Energy Programs: Adopting integrated development strategies
that consider the broader socioeconomic context can improve the effectiveness of
energy projects. This approach ensures that energy interventions address the
specific needs and priorities of different social groups, including women and
marginalized communities. Participatory Approaches Are Essential: Engaging
communities, especially women and marginalized groups, in the planning,
implementation, and evaluation of energy projects ensures that diverse
perspectives are considered. This approach enhances the relevance and impact of
energy interventions. Access to Training and Finance Is Key for Inclusion:
Enhancing access to technical training and financial services, such as micro-
financing and gendered budgeting, is crucial for enabling marginalized
communities to benefit from sustainable energy solutions. Policy and Regulatory
Frameworks Must Be Inclusive: Integrating gender equality and social inclusion
in energy policies and frameworks is necessary for creating an enabling
environment that supports equitable access to sustainable energy. Addressing the
Needs of Marginalized Communities Is Imperative: Remote, rural, and indigenous
communities face unique challenges in accessing sustainable energy. Tailored
solutions that consider the specific geographical, cultural, and social contexts
of these communities are essential for closing the energy access gap. Energy
Resilience Is Critical in Fragile and Conflict Contexts: In settings affected by
conflict and crisis, ensuring access to reliable and sustainable energy is vital
for supporting basic needs, healthcare, education, and economic recovery. Energy
resilience enhances the capacity of communities to withstand and recover from
shocks and stresses. Sustainable Energy Is Integral to Social and Economic
Development: Access to affordable, reliable, and sustainable energy is a
cornerstone for achieving broader development goals. Equity, equality, and
justice in sustainable energy are fundamental for building resilient
communities, fostering social cohesion, and supporting inclusive growth. 2
footnote1) footnote2) https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2022/goal-07/
footnote3) https://www.who.int/news/item/20-01-2022-who-publishes-new-global-
data-on-the-use-of-clean-and-polluting-fuels-for-cooking-by-fuel-type footnote4)
https://www.iec.ch/blog/electrifying-africa#:~:text=According%20to%20the%20repor
t%2C%20in,with%20no%20access%20to%20electricity. footnote5) IEA, IRENA, UNSD,
World Bank, WHO. 2021. Tracking SDG 7: The Energy Progress Report. World Bank,
Washington, DC. <a href="https://trackingsdg7.esmap.org/downloads">https://track
ingsdg7.esmap.org/downloads</a>. footnote6) ESMAP (Energy Sector Management
Assistance Program). 2020. Regulatory Indicators for Sustainable Energy (RISE):
Sustaining the Momentum. Washington, DC: World Bank. <a
href="https://rise.esmap.org/reports">https://rise.esmap.org/reports</a>.
footnote7) SE4All (Sustainable Energy for All). 2021. Energizing Finance:
Understanding the Landscape. Washington, D.C., and New York. Energizing Finance
Research Serie <a href="https://www.seforall.org/energy-
finance">https://www.seforall.org/energy-finance</a> footnote8) <a href="https:/
/documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099843506202272145/pdf/IDU0e50ebfe90b3aa04b
9a0b0ea0e30f2b02de84.pdf">https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/0998435062
02272145/pdf/IDU0e50ebfe90b3aa04b9a0b0ea0e30f2b02de84.pdf</a> footnote9)
https://www.law.columbia.edu/news/archive/kimberle-crenshaw-intersectionality-
more-two-decades-later footnote10) https://www.unwomen.org/en/what-we-
do/economic-empowerment/facts-and-figures footnote11)
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41893-022-01039-8 footnote12)
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41599-023-01604-2 footnote13)
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000212122 footnote14)
https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/engineering/sustainable-energy footnote15)
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/frsc.2021.663000/full footnote16)
https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/engineering/energy-justice footnote17) <a h
ref="https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0973082622002344">https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0973082622002344</a> footnote18)
Laqueur, Thomas. Making Sex: Body and Gender from the Greeks to Freud.
Illustrated, revised edition. Harvard University Press, 1992. footnote19) <a
href="https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2023-11/ohchr-technical-note-
rights-intersex-
people.pdf">https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2023-11/ohchr-technical-
note-rights-intersex-people.pdf</a> footnote20) Butler, Judith. Gender Trouble:
Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. New York: Routledge, 1990. footnote21)
https://www.unicef.org/rosa/media/1761/file/Genderglossarytermsandconcepts.pdf
footnote22) https://www.unicef.org/rosa/reports/gender-equality footnote23)
https://www.un.org/womenwatch/osagi/conceptsandefinitions.htm footnote24) <a
href="https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/sites/31a54092-
en/index.html?itemId=/content/component/31a54092-en">https://www.oecd-ilibrary.o
rg/sites/31a54092-en/index.html?itemId=/content/component/31a54092-en</a>
footnote25) <a href="https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/publicat
ions/ENGLISH_LGBTI_index_march2019.pdf">https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgk
e326/files/publications/ENGLISH_LGBTI_index_march2019.pdf</a> footnote26) <a
href="https://strategicplan.undp.org/">https://strategicplan.undp.org/</a>
footnote27) https://genderequalitystrategy.undp.org/ footnote28)
https://www.undp.org/energy/our-work-areas/energy-and-gender-equality
footnote29) https://www.iea.org/articles/tracking-gender-and-the-clean-energy-
transition footnote30) https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/1
8041SDG7_Policy_Brief.pdf footnote31) ENERGIA, https://www.energia.org/case-
gender-perspective-energy-access/ footnote32) ADB (2012) Gender Tool Kit: Energy
-Going Beyond the Meter, https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-
document/33650/files/gender-toolkit-energy.pdf footnote33) ADB (2012) Gender
Tool Kit: Energy -Going Beyond the Meter,
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-
document/33650/files/gender-toolkit-energy.pdf footnote34) UN Women (2019)
Progress of the World’s Women 2019-2020: Families in a Changing World, https://a
rabstates.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/Field%20Office%20Arab%20States/Attachm
ents/Publications/2
020/01/Family%20Report/Family%20Flagship%20Full%20Report%20EN.pdf footnote35)
SIDA (1998), Energy policy & equality between women and men,
https://www.oecd.org/dac/gender- development/1849338.pdf footnote36) <a href="ht
tps://energia.org/assets/2023/02/Womens_Inclusive_Financing_Report_Final.pdf">ht
tps://energia.org/assets/2023/02/Womens_Inclusive_Financing_Report_Final.pdf</a>
footnote37) <a href="https://sdg-action.org/the-lack-of-gender-targets-for-
clean-energy-is-harming-women-and-girls/">https://sdg-action.org/the-lack-of-
gender-targets-for-clean-energy-is-harming-women-and-girls/</a> footnote38) <a
href="https://cleancooking.org/sector-directory/bidhaa-
sasa/">https://cleancooking.org/sector-directory/bidhaa-sasa/</a> footnote39) <a
href="https://www.icrw.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/ICRW_Bidhaa-
Sasa_CaseStudy.pdf">https://www.icrw.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/ICRW_Bidhaa-
Sasa_CaseStudy.pdf</a> footnote40) <a href="https://www.globalissues.org/news/20
24/02/19/36025">https://www.globalissues.org/news/2024/02/19/36025</a>
footnote41) Karekezi, S., G.B. , Khamarunga , and W. Kithyoma , and X. Ochieng,
footnote42) Danielsen, K., ‘Gender Equality, Women’s Rights and Access to Energy
Services: An inspiration paper in the run-up to Rio+20’. Danish Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, Denmark, 2012. footnote43) UN Women (2019) Progress of the
World’s Women 2019-2020: Families in a Changing World, <a href="https://arabstat
es.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/Field%20Office%20Arab%20States/Attachments/Pu
blications/2020/01/Family%20Report/Family%20Flagship%20Full%20Report%20EN.pdf">h
ttps://arabstates.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/Field%20Office%20Arab%20States
/Attachments/Publications/2020/01/Family%20Report/Family%20Flagship%20Full%20Rep
ort%20EN.pdf</a> footnote44) UNICEF, Girls spend 160 million more hours than
boys doing household chores every day, 7 October 2016, <a
href="https://www.unicef.org/press-releases/girls-spend-160-million-more-hours-
boys-doing-household-chores-everyday#:~:text=NEW%20YORK%2C%207%20October%2C%2020
16%20%E2%80%93%20Girls%20between,International%20Day%20of%20the%20Girl%20on%2011
%20October">https://www.unicef.org/press-releases/girls-spend-160-million-more-
hours-boys-doing-household-chores-everyday#:~:text=NEW%20YORK%2C%207%20October%2
C%202016%20%E2%80%93%20Girls%20between,International%20Day%20of%20the%20Girl%20o
n%2011%20October</a> footnote45) ADB (2012) Gender Tool Kit: Energy -Going
Beyond the Meter, <a
href="https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-
document/33650/files/gender-toolkit-
energy.pdf">https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-
document/33650/files/gender-toolkit-energy.pdf</a> footnote46) World Bank,
‘Gender and Climate Change: Three Things You Should Know’, fact sheet, 2011a,
available at: http://go.worldbank.org/TN0KYRX8Q0 (accessed 22 October 2012).
footnote47) (Smith, K. et al. 2014). footnote48) (WHO 2016a). footnote49) World
Bank, Gender Equality and the Millennium Development Goals, Washington, DC,
2003. footnote50) (WHO 2014).; World Bank. (2006). “Gender, Time Use, and
Poverty in Sub-Saharan Africa”, Working Paper no. 73. footnote51) United Nations
Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA) 2010: Economic Report on Africa Promoting
High-Level Sustainable Growth to Reduce Unemployment in Africa. United Nations
Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA), Addis Ababa. footnote52) Danielsen, K.,
‘Gender Equality, Women’s Rights and Access to Energy Services: An inspiration
paper in the run-up to Rio+20’. Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Denmark,
2012. footnote53) ENERGIA, https://www.energia.org/what-we-do/why-gender-and-
energy/ footnote54) UNDP-GGCA (2016), Gender and Climate Change: Gender and
Sustainable Energy, https://www.undp.org/publications/gender-and-sustainable-
energy) footnote55) Deloitte University Press (2015) Women, Energy, and Economic
Empowerment <a href="https://www.theatlantic.com/sponsored/deloitte-
shifts/women-energy-and-economic-
empowerment/261/">https://www.theatlantic.com/sponsored/deloitte-shifts/women-
energy-and-economic-empowerment/261/</a> footnote56) World Economic Forum.
(2016). The Industry gender gap. Women and Work in the Fourth Industrial
Revolution, Chart on Gender wage gap and women’s participation by industry, p.
4. At: <a href="http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_FOJ_Executive_Summary_GenderGap
.pdf">http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_FOJ_Executive_Summary_GenderGap.pdf</a>
footnote57) USAID. (2016). Engendering Utilities: Improving Gender Diversity in
Power Sector Utilities. At: <a href="https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/d
ocuments/1865/Engendering-
%20Utilities.pdf">https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1865/Engen
dering- Utilities.pdf</a> footnote58) IRENA. (2016). Renewable energy and jobs:
Annual Review 2016. At: <a href="http://www.irena.org/DocumentDownloads/Publicat
ions/IRENA_RE_Jobs_Annual_Review_2016.pdf">http://www.irena.org/DocumentDownload
s/Publications/IRENA_RE_Jobs_Annual_Review_2016.pdf</a> footnote59) IRENA.
(2016). Renewable energy and jobs: Annual Review 2016. At: <a href="http://www.i
rena.org/DocumentDownloads/Publications/IRENA_RE_Jobs_Annual_Review_2016.pdf">ht
tp://www.irena.org/DocumentDownloads/Publications/IRENA_RE_Jobs_Annual_Review_20
16.pdf</a> footnote60) Rojas, A., Prebble, M. & Siles, J. (2015). Flipping the
switch: Ensuring the energy sector is sustainable and gender-responsive. In L.
Aguilar, M. Granat, & C. Owren (Authors), Roots for the future: The landscape
and way forward on gender and climate change. Washington, DC: IUCN & GGCA. At:
<a href="https://portals.iucn.org/union/sites/union/files/doc/rftf_2015_chapter_
4.1.pdf">https://portals.iucn.org/union/sites/union/files/doc/rftf_2015_chapter_
4.1.pdf</a> footnote61) International Energy Agency (IEA), Energy and gender, A
critical issue in energy sector employment and energy access <a
href="https://www.iea.org/topics/energy-and-
gender">https://www.iea.org/topics/energy-and-gender</a> footnote62) ENERGIA, <a
href="https://www.energia.org/case-gender-perspective-energy-
access/">https://www.energia.org/case-gender-perspective-energy-access/</a>
footnote63) International Energy Agency (IEA), Energy and gender, A critical
issue in energy sector employment and energy access footnote64) <a href="https:/
/www.irena.org//media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2019/Jan/IRENA_Gender_persp
ective_2019.pdf?rev=bed1c40882e54e4da21002e3e1939e3d">https://www.irena.org//med
ia/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2019/Jan/IRENA_Gender_perspective_2019.pdf?rev
=bed1c40882e54e4da21002e3e1939e3d</a> footnote65) IEA, 2021 footnote66) <a
href="https://www.iea.org/articles/understanding-gender-gaps-in-wages-
employment-and-career-trajectories-in-the-energy-
sector">https://www.iea.org/articles/understanding-gender-gaps-in-wages-
employment-and-career-trajectories-in-the-energy-sector</a> footnote67) <a href=
"https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2022.pdf">https://www3.weforum.org/docs/
WEF_GGGR_2022.pdf</a> footnote68) <a href="https://www.iea.org/data-and-
statistics/data-tools/gender-and-energy-data-explorer?Topic=Senior+Management&In
dicator=Share+of+female+senior+managers+%28country+of+headquarters%29">https://w
ww.iea.org/data-and-statistics/data-tools/gender-and-energy-data-explorer?Topic=
Senior+Management&Indicator=Share+of+female+senior+managers+%28country+of+headqu
arters%29</a> footnote69) WEF, 2022 footnote70)      EY. (2016). Women in power
and utility index 2015. <a href="http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/EY-
women-in-power-and-utilities-index-2015/%24FILE/EY-women-in-%20power-and-
utilities-index-2015.pdf">http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/EY-women-in-
power-and-utilities-index-2015/%24FILE/EY-women-in- power-and-utilities-
index-2015.pdf</a> footnote71) IUCN. (2015). Women in environmental decision
making: New research from the Environment and Gender Index (EGI). At:
https://portals.iucn.org/union/sites/union/files/doc/
egi_factsheet_desicion_making_web_sept2015.pdf footnote72) EY. (2016). Women in
power and utility index 2015. <a
href="http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/EY-women-in-power-and-utilities-
index-2015/%24FILE/EY-women-in-%20power-and-utilities-
index-2015.pdf">http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/EY-women-in-power-and-
utilities-index-2015/%24FILE/EY-women-in- power-and-utilities-index-2015.pdf</a>
footnote73) ENERGIA, <a href="https://www.energia.org/case-gender-perspective-
energy-access/">https://www.energia.org/case-gender-perspective-energy-
access/</a> footnote74) ENERGIA, <a href="https://www.energia.org/case-gender-
perspective-energy-access/">https://www.energia.org/case-gender-perspective-
energy-access/</a> footnote75) Amanda Beaujon Marin and Anne T. Kuriakose (2017)
Gender and Sustainable Forest Management: Entry Points for Design and
Implementation, <a href="https://www.climateinvestmentfunds.org/sites/cif_enc/fi
les/knowledgedocuments/gender_and_sustainable_forest_management.pdf">https://www
.climateinvestmentfunds.org/sites/cif_enc/files/knowledgedocuments/gender_and_su
stainable_forest_management.pdf</a> footnote76) Reference: World Bank Group
(2019), Women in Water Utilities, Breaking Barriers,
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/32319/ 140993.pdf)
footnote77) McKinsey Global Institute (MGI),“The Power of parity: How Advancing
Women’s Equality Can Add $12 Trillion to Global Growth”. McKinsey & Company,
2015. footnote78) Leisher, Craig, G Temsah, F Booker, M Day, L Samberg, D
Prosnitz, B Agarwal, E Matthews, D Roe, D Russell, T Sunderland and D Wilkie,
“Does the gender composition of forest and fishery management groups affect
resource governance and conservation outcomes? A systematic map” Environmental
Evidence. The official journal of the Collaboration for Environmental Evidence
5:6, 2016. footnote79) Agrawal A., Yadama G. and Bhattacharya A.,
“Decentralization and environmental conservation: Gender effects from
participation in joint forest management,” CAPRi Working Paper No. 53. 2006.
footnote80) World Bank. 2012. World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and
Development, World Bank: Washington, DC. footnote81)   UNDP (2011) “Towards an
‘energy plus’ approach for the poor - A review of good practices and lessons
learned from Asia and the Pacific” http://web.undp.org/asia/pdf/EnergyPlus.pdf
footnote82) https://www.oecd.org/publications/entrepreneurship-policies-through-
the-gender-lens-71c8f9c9-en.htm footnote83)
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01557/full footnote84)
https://www.bcg.com/publications/2014/bridging-entrepreneurship-gender-gap
footnote85) Kopernik. At: https://www.kopernik.ngo/page/wonder-women-indonesia
footnote86) Solar Sister. At: https://www.solarsister.org/ footnote87) Winrock
International. At: https://www.winrock.org/training-trainers-to-empower-
cookstove-entrepreneurs/ footnote88) The Global Alliance for Clean Cookstoves
(2015). Understanding Impacts of Women’s Engagement in the Improved Cookstove
Value Chain in Kenya. At:
http://cleancookstoves.org/about/news/05-04-2015-study-shows-women-cookstove-
sellers-outsell-men-3-to-1.html footnote89) Biogas Sector Partnership Nepal
(BSP). (2009). Gender mainstreaming in the biogas support program, Nepal.
ENERGIA. At: http://megaslides.com/doc/1206059/gender- mainstreaming-in-the-
biogas-program footnote90) SNV. (2015). Women in Dong Hoi reap initial benefits
from ADB-funded climate change mitigation initiatives. At:
http://www.snv.org/project/harnessing-climate-change- mitigation-initiatives-
benefit-women footnote91) Barefoot College. At: http://www.barefootcollege.org/
footnote92) Grameen Shakti. At: http://www.gshakti.org/ footnote93) <a href="htt
ps://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/migration/tr/Annex-
9.pdf">https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/migration/tr/Annex-
9.pdf</a> footnote94) http://gender.careinternationalwikis.org/_media/care_gende
r_marker_guidance_english.pdf footnote95) UNDP, 2007. Guidance Notes on
Mainstreaming Gender into UNDP’s Environment and Energy Practice. footnote96)
Department for International Development (DFID), 2002. Gender Manual: A
Practical Guide for Development Policy-Makers and Practitioners. footnote97)
Department for International Development (DFID), 2002. Gender Manual: A
Practical Guide for Development Policy-Makers and Practitioners. footnote98)
UNDP, 2007. Guidance Notes on Mainstreaming Gender into UNDP’s Environment and
Energy Practice. footnote99)        https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=87EiYes9p3s
footnote100)        https://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/lsms/initiatives/lsms-
plus footnote101) (UNDP, 2007). footnote102) (Department for International
Development (DFID), 2002. Gender Manual: A Practical Guide for Development
Policy-Makers and Practitioners. footnote103) (Flintan, 2003). footnote104)
Department for International Development (DFID), 2002. Gender Manual: A
Practical Guide for Development Policy-Makers and Practitioners. footnote105)
UNDP 2003 footnote106) (Department for International Development (DFID), 2002.
Gender Manual: A Practical Guide for Development Policy-Makers and
Practitioners. footnote107) UNDP, 2001. Generating Opportunities: Case Studies
in Energy and Women. footnote108) (DFID, 2002). footnote109) UNDP, 2007.
Guidance Notes on Mainstreaming Gender into UNDP’s Environment and Energy
Practice. footnote110) FAO, 2001b. Project Cycle Management: Technical Guide,
Socio-Economic and Gender Analysis Program (SEAGA). footnote111)
https://www.cif.org/sites/cif_enc/files/gender_and_re_digital.pdf footnote112) h
ttps://www.oecd.org/dac/evaluation/daccriteriaforevaluatingdevelopmentassistance
.htm footnote113)
https://www.unicef.org/rosa/media/1761/file/Genderglossarytermsandconcepts.pdf
footnote114) https://genderhealthdata.org/resource/differences-between-sex-
disaggregated-data-and-gendered-health-data/ footnote115) https://www.undp.org/s
ites/g/files/zskgke326/files/publications/genderengtoolkit.pdf footnote116)
https://www.undp.org/publications/mainstreaming-gender-mitigation-and-technology
footnote117) https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/publications/TM3
-Africa_Gender-and-Energy.pdf footnote118) <a href="https://unesdoc.unesco.org/i
n/documentViewer.xhtml?v=2.1.196&id=p::usmarcdef_0000186606&file=/in/rest/annota
tionSVC/DownloadWatermarkedAttachment/attach_import_8998157d-ba79-4f5a-b28b-
a8077e383727%3F_%3D186606eng.pdf&locale=es&multi=true&ark=/ark:/48223/pf00001866
06/PDF/186606eng.pdf#%5B%7B%22num%22%3A961%2C%22gen%22%3A0%7D%2C%7B%22name%22%3A
%22XYZ%22%7D%2Cnull%2Cnull%2C0%5D">https://unesdoc.unesco.org/in/documentViewer.
xhtml?v=2.1.196&id=p::usmarcdef_0000186606&file=/in/rest/annotationSVC/DownloadW
atermarkedAttachment/attach_import_8998157d-ba79-4f5a-b28b-
a8077e383727%3F_%3D186606eng.pdf&locale=es&multi=true&ark=/ark:/48223/pf00001866
06/PDF/186606eng.pdf#%5B%7B%22num%22%3A961%2C%22gen%22%3A0%7D%2C%7B%22name%22%3A
%22XYZ%22%7D%2Cnull%2Cnull%2C0%5D</a> footnote119) <a href="https://link.springe
r.com/book/10.1057/9780230501850#page=122">https://link.springer.com/book/10.105
7/9780230501850#page=122</a> (Steward, 2005) footnote120) <a href="https://journ
als.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/095624780201400104">https://journals.sagepub.com
/doi/abs/10.1177/095624780201400104</a> (Beall, 2002) footnote121) <a
href="https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/impact/2020/08/indigenous-women-demand-
more-protection-in-decades-long-fight-for-amazon-
homelands/">https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/impact/2020/08/indigenous-women-
demand-more-protection-in-decades-long-fight-for-amazon-homelands/</a>
footnote122) <a href="https://www.iea.org/reports/tracking-sdg7-the-energy-
progress-report-2023">https://www.iea.org/reports/tracking-sdg7-the-energy-
progress-report-2023</a> footnote123) <a href="https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstr
act/document/6832776">https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/6832776</a>
footnote124) <a href="https://www.nature.com/articles/s41893-022-00994-
6">https://www.nature.com/articles/s41893-022-00994-6</a> footnote125) United
Nations General Assembly (2007). UNDRIP, Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
People. footnote126) United Nations General Assembly (2008). UNDROP, Declaration
on the Rights of Peasants and Other People Working in Rural Areas. footnote127)
Ehrlich, D., et al. (2021), “Population Trends and Urbanisation in Mountain
Ranges of the World”, Land, vol. 10/3 p. 255, <a href="https://doi.org/10.3390/l
and10030255">https://doi.org/10.3390/land10030255</a> footnote128) <a
href="https://www.irena.org/Publications/2023/Nov/Renewable-energy-for-remote-
communities-A-guidebook-for-off-grid-
projects">https://www.irena.org/Publications/2023/Nov/Renewable-energy-for-
remote-communities-A-guidebook-for-off-grid-projects</a> footnote129)
https://www.irena.org/Publications/2023/Nov/Renewable-energy-for-remote-
communities-A-guidebook-for-off-grid-projects footnote130) <a
href="https://social.desa.un.org/issues/indigenous-peoples/indigenous-peoples-
at-the-united-nations">https://social.desa.un.org/issues/indigenous-
peoples/indigenous-peoples-at-the-united-nations</a>). footnote131) United
Nations. <a href="https://www.un.org/en/fight-racism/vulnerable-
groups/indigenous-peoples">https://www.un.org/en/fight-racism/vulnerable-
groups/indigenous-peoples</a> footnote132) <a
href="https://www.un.org/development/desa/indigenouspeoples/declaration-
on-%20the-rights-of-indigenous-
peoples.html">https://www.un.org/development/desa/indigenouspeoples/declaration-
on-%20the-rights-of-indigenous-peoples.html</a> footnote133) <a
href="https://social.desa.un.org/issues/indigenous-
peoples/unpfii">https://social.desa.un.org/issues/indigenous-peoples/unpfii</a>
footnote134) United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. Report on the
twenty-second session (17-28 April 2023). footnote135) <a
href="https://enb.iisd.org/events/land-and-environmental-defenders-advancing-
climate-justice">https://enb.iisd.org/events/land-and-environmental-defenders-
advancing-climate-justice</a>). footnote136) <a
href="https://www.salemstate.edu/news/new-study-fossil-fuels-disproportionately-
impact-black-brown-indigenous-and-poor-communities-throughout-supply-chain-may-
18-
2023#:~:text=The%20publication%20draws%20from%20200,disproportionate%20burden%20
of%20these%20harms">https://www.salemstate.edu/news/new-study-fossil-fuels-
disproportionately-impact-black-brown-indigenous-and-poor-communities-
throughout-supply-chain-may-18-
2023#:~:text=The%20publication%20draws%20from%20200,disproportionate%20burden%20
of%20these%20harms</a>. footnote137) <a href="https://www.nature.com/articles/s4
1893-022-00994-6">https://www.nature.com/articles/s41893-022-00994-6</a>
footnote138) <a href="https://www.sei.org/perspectives/impacts-of-green-
transition-on-indigenous-peoples/">https://www.sei.org/perspectives/impacts-of-
green-transition-on-indigenous-peoples/</a> footnote139) <a href="https://www.na
ture.com/articles/s41893-022-00994-6">https://www.nature.com/articles/s41893-
022-00994-6</a> footnote140)       <a href="https://www.researchgate.net/publica
tion/356252031_Challenging_dominant_sustainability_worldviews_on_the_energy_tran
sition_Lessons_from_Indigenous_communities_in_Mexico_and_a_plea_for_pluriversal_
technologies">https://www.researchgate.net/publication/356252031_Challenging_dom
inant_sustainability_worldviews_on_the_energy_transition_Lessons_from_Indigenous
_communities_in_Mexico_and_a_plea_for_pluriversal_technologies</a> footnote141)
Pluriversal technologies can be understood as technologies that embrace
ontological and epistemological diversity by being co-designed, co-produced and
co-owned by the inhabitants of the socio-cultural territory in which they are
embedded. <a href="https://www.researchgate.net/publication/356252031_Challengin
g_dominant_sustainability_worldviews_on_the_energy_transition_Lessons_from_Indig
enous_communities_in_Mexico_and_a_plea_for_pluriversal_technologies">https://www
.researchgate.net/publication/356252031_Challenging_dominant_sustainability_worl
dviews_on_the_energy_transition_Lessons_from_Indigenous_communities_in_Mexico_an
d_a_plea_for_pluriversal_technologies</a> footnote142) <a href="https://unstats.
un.org/sdgs/report/2023/">https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2023/</a>
footnote143) <a
href="https://sdgs.un.org/goals/goal16">https://sdgs.un.org/goals/goal16</a>
footnote144) <a href="https://www.undp.org/latin-america/publications/guidance-
note-climate-peace-and-security-latin-america-and-
caribbean">https://www.undp.org/latin-america/publications/guidance-note-
climate-peace-and-security-latin-america-and-caribbean</a> footnote145) UN
Habitat (2023). Rescuing SDG 11 for a Resilient Urban Planet. <a href="https://u
nhabitat.org/sites/default/files/2023/11/sdg_11_synthesis_report_2023.pdf">https
://unhabitat.org/sites/default/files/2023/11/sdg_11_synthesis_report_2023.pdf</a
> footnote146) UN Statistics Division <a href="https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/repor
t/2022/goal-
11/#:~:text=In%202020%2C%20about%20one%20in,Saharan%20Africa%20(230%20million).)
">https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2022/goal-
11/#:~:text=In%202020%2C%20about%20one%20in,Saharan%20Africa%20(230%20million).)
</a> footnote147) UN Habitat (2023). Rescuing SDG 11 for a Resilient Urban
Planet. <a href="https://unhabitat.org/sites/default/files/2023/11/sdg_11_synthe
sis_report_2023.pdf">https://unhabitat.org/sites/default/files/2023/11/sdg_11_sy
nthesis_report_2023.pdf</a> footnote148) UN Statistics Division <a href="https:/
/unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2022/goal-
11/#:~:text=The%20region%20with%20the%20highest,in%20Africa%20and%20Asia%2C%20re
spectively">https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2022/goal-
11/#:~:text=The%20region%20with%20the%20highest,in%20Africa%20and%20Asia%2C%20re
spectively</a>. footnote149) UN Habitat (2023). Rescuing SDG 11 for a Resilient
Urban Planet. <a href="https://unhabitat.org/sites/default/files/2023/11/sdg_11_
synthesis_report_2023.pdf">https://unhabitat.org/sites/default/files/2023/11/sdg
_11_synthesis_report_2023.pdf</a> footnote150) UN Habitat (2023). Rescuing SDG
11 for a Resilient Urban Planet. <a href="https://unhabitat.org/sites/default/fi
les/2023/11/sdg_11_synthesis_report_2023.pdf">https://unhabitat.org/sites/defaul
t/files/2023/11/sdg_11_synthesis_report_2023.pdf</a> footnote151) UN Habitat
(2022). Global Action Plan. <a href="https://unhabitat.org/sites/default/files/2
023/05/global_action_plan_22-05-
23.pdf">https://unhabitat.org/sites/default/files/2023/05/global_action_plan_22-
05-23.pdf</a> footnote152) <a href="https://www.mdpi.com/1996-
1073/16/12/4687">https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/16/12/4687</a> endnote1)