 >Graphical user interface, application Description automatically generated<>A
picture containing nature, smoke, spring, steam Description automatically
generated< Sustainable Energy Academy – Module 4 UNDP Sustainable Energy Hub
March 1, 2024 Module 4: Just Energy Transition Module Overview This module
delves into the concept of a just energy transition, exploring diverse models
and interpretations, and examining the shift from conventional fossil fuels to
sustainable energy within decentralized systems. It highlights community-led
solutions and the transformative potential of locally-driven initiatives,
specifically addressing social, economic, and environmental justice aspects. The
module promotes inclusive processes considering unique local and regional
contexts and critically analyzes the role of extractive industries in shaping
energy landscapes. The module underscores the need for tailored approaches,
emphasizing that a one-size-fits-all approach is not applicable and recognizing
variations in the path to a just energy transition based on local realities. The
module particularly focuses on strategies beyond environmental considerations,
highlighting worker retraining, social safety nets, and policies for economic
diversification as integral components of a just transition, ensuring the
prioritization of the well-being of workers and affected communities in the
shift to sustainable energy sources. Learning Objectives After participating in
this module, learners will be able to: 1) Develop a comprehensive understanding
of the concept of a just energy transition and analyze its various models and
interpretations, emphasizing its significance in promoting sustainable energy
development and justice principles. 2)        Recognize the importance of
tailoring energy transition approaches to specific social and economic contexts,
recognizing the diversity of transition forms and the need to address regional
disparities effectively. 3) Assess the complex interplay of environmental
degradation, social consequences, and human rights concerns in energy
transitions, and propose strategies to mitigate negative impacts while promoting
justice and equity. 4)     Analyze the role of worker retraining, skills
development, income support, and economic diversification in facilitating a just
and equitable transition within the energy sector, considering regional
disparities and social equity. 5)        Critically evaluate the impact of
extractive industries on energy landscapes, examining their contributions to
sustainable energy production, economic development, and environmental and
social implications, with a focus on justice considerations. Contents Module 4:
Just Energy Transition        1 Module Overview       1 Learning Objectives   1
Table of Case Studies 3 Table of Boxes        3 Table of Figures      4 1
Introduction to the Energy Transition Landscape 6 1.1. The energy transition in
context 9 1.2. What is a JUST energy transition?        10 1.3. What can the
energy transition look like?       12 1.3.1. Decarbonization of the energy
system – What is net zero?      13 1.4. Challenges for a Just Energy Transition
15 1.4.1. Regional and Community Dependence on Fossil Fuel Industries   15
1.4.2. Importance of Proactive Planning and Strategic Foresight      17 2
Unintended Consequences of the Energy Transition        20 2.1  Critical
Minerals and Materials 23 2.1.1        Rising Demand and Implications  25 2.1.2
Environmental Impacts of Mining 27 2.1.3        Responsible Resource extraction
28 Current Status of Mining Sustainability      30 2.2  Environmental Concerns
of Clean Energy Technology Deployment    32 2.2.1        Wind Turbines Impacts
34 2.2.2        Impacts of Solar Power  36 2.2.3        Hydropower Impacts
36 2.2.4        Mitigating Environmental Harm   37 2.3  Human Rights and Socio-
Economic Impacts 37 2.3.1        Human Rights Concerns   38 2.3.2        Social
Impacts on Communities   41 Box 3: The Ethical Dilemma of Extractive Industries
and Infrastructure Projects      42 2.3.3        Economic Ramifications  43 3
Ensuring a Just Transition for Workers and Affected Communities 46 3.1  Worker
Retraining and Skills Development        46 Case Study RBEC: Bridging the Skills
gap in North Macedonia  49 3.1.1        Regional Disparities for Job Creation
49 3.1.2        Gender Disparities in the Energy Sector 50 3.2  Social Safety
Nets and Income Support   52 Energy Safety Nets (ESNs) for Increased Energy
Access        52 Poverty Alleviation and Social Stability     53 Targeting
Disadvantaged Individuals and Communities  54 Case Study RBA: Modelling the
employment Impacts of Energy Policies to Guide NDC Enhancement and a Just
Transition – Zimbabwe        56 3.3  Community-Led Sustainable Energy Projects
and Community-Based Solutions 56 Case Study Caribbean SIDS: La Cooperativa
Hidroeléctrica de la Montaña (The Mountain Hydroelectric Cooperative)      58
3.4  Participatory Processes and Prior Informed Consent      58 Case Study
RBLAC: Pacto Intercultural por La Yanama para el Desarrollo Humano y Buen Vivir
en La Guajira– Informed Prior Consent     61 4    A Just Energy Transition for
the Global South   62 4.1  Challenges and Opportunities for developing countries
62 4.1.1        Advancing the Value Chain       63 From lithium extraction to
the electric vehicle      63 Case Study RBAS: Renewable Energy Manufacturing
Initiative – Morocco 66 4.1.2        Land-related Conflicts and Water Use
Considerations     66 4.1.3        Persistent Poverty and Energy Access Gaps
67 Case Study RBAP: Sustainable Biomass Energy - How can women upscaled their
fish drying business?     68 4.2  Governance Strategies for a Just Energy
Transition      69 4.3  Just Energy Transition Partnerships (JETP) Financing
Mechanisms 71 5    Annex   74 Table of Case Studies Case Study 1: Bridging the
Skills gap in North Macedonia       47 Case Study 2: RBA: Modelling the
employment Impacts of Energy Policies to Guide NDC Enhancement and a Just
Transition – Zimbabwe     53 Case Study 3: Caribbean SIDS: La Cooperativa
Hidroeléctrica de la Montaña (The Mountain Hydroelectric Cooperative) – Puerto
Rico     56 Case Study 3: RBLAC: Pacto Intercultural por La Yanama para el
Desarrollo Humano y Buen Vivir en La Guajira– Informed Prior Consent – Colombia
58 Case Study 2: RBAS: Renewable Energy Manufacturing Initiative – Morocco
63 Case Study 3: RBAP: Sustainable Biomass Energy - How can women upscaled their
fish drying business? – Sri Lanka      66 Table of Boxes Box 1: The 8 core
principles of a Just Energy Transformation  12 Box 2: The Escazú Agreement  37
Box 3: IPCC’s 11 elements of a just transition.      43 Box 4: What is Energy
Democracy?     53 Table of Figures Figure 1: Global Primary energy consumption
by source (1800-2022) in terawatt-hours. Source: Energy Institute - Statistical
Review of World Energy (2023); Smil (2017)      6 Figure 2: Evolution of Global
Primary Energy Consumption by Source (1920-2022) in relative values. Source:
Energy Institute - Statistical Review of World Energy (2023); Smil (2017)  7
Figure 3: CO2 Emissions Per Year Required to Achieve Net-Zero by 2050 Source: ht
tps://www.researchgate.net/publication/365421862_Towards_Responsible_and_Informe
d_Ocean-Based_Carbon_Dioxide_Removal_Research_and_Governance_Priorities/figures
10 Figure 4: Share of primary energy consumption from fossil fuels, 2022
Measured as a percentage of primary energy, using the substitution method.
Source: OurWorldInData.org/energy.  13 Figure 5: Evolution of the Share of
Primary Energy Consumption from Fossil Fuels Across Global Regions (1965-2022)
Source: OurWorldInData.org/energy based on Energy Institute - Statistical Review
of World Energy (2023).  14 Figure 6: a) Geographic distribution of mining
projects. b) Distribution of energy transition minerals and metals reserves and
resources. The selected 17 minerals and metals have the highest number of
extractive projects worldwide. Percentages at the top of the figure represent
those for the ‘total combined Indigenous and peasants’ variable.      18 Figure
7: Minerals Essential for Renewable Energy Technologies Source:
https://www.iisd.org/publications/report/green-conflict-minerals-fuels-conflict-
transition-low-carbon-economy 19 Figure 8: Distinguishing Characteristics
between Fossil Fuels and Critical Minerals Source:
https://www.irena.org/Publications/2023/Jul/Geopolitics-of-the-Energy-
Transition-Critical-Materials      20 Figure 9: Global distribution of mining
and refining supply for selected critical materials, 2022. Source: IRENA (2023)
21 Figure 10: Demand for key materials and share of clean energy in total demand
https://www.iea.org/news/critical-minerals-market-sees-unprecedented-growth-as-
clean-energy-demand-drives-strong-increase-in-investment        22 Figure 11:
Key mining countries for select minerals. 23 Figure 12: Gender, social, health
and safety indicators for selected mining companies        26 Figure 13:
Lifecycle greenhouse gas emission ranges for different technologies Source: Life
Cycle Assessment of Electricity Generation Options. UNECE (2022)
https://unece.org/sed/documents/2021/10/reports/life-cycle-assessment-
electricity-generation-options    30 Figure 14: Documented human rights and
energy conflicts around the globe. Black: Fossil Fuel Related Conflicts. Brown:
Biomass and Land Conflicts (includes forests, agriculture, and livestock
management). Blue: Water Management Conflicts. Yellow: Nuclear Related Conflicts
Source: Environmental Justice Atlas. https://ejatlas.org/   34 Figure 15:
Employment difference by sector between the baseline and 1.5°C Scenario,
thousand jobs. Source: https://www.undp.org/eurasia/blog/what-are-socio-
economic-impacts-energy-transition       40 Figure 16: Poverty and HDI in
relation to dependance on extractive industries.       41 Figure 17: Global
employment in energy supply in the Net Zero Scenario, 2019-2030    44 Figure 18:
Energy employment by economic activity and by region, 2022 (thousand workers)
Source: https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-employment-2023/executive-
summary  46 Figure 19: Value chain of a lithium battery Source:
https://publications.iadb.org/publications/spanish/viewer/Del-litio-al-vehiculo-
electrico-en-America-Latina-y-el-Caribe.pdf      56 Figure 20: Principle for
Effective Governance for Sustainable Development. Source: UN ECOSOC (2018)  61
Figure 21: Market size for key energy transition minerals    66 Figure 22:
Additional workers in clean energy and related sectors in the Net Zero Scenario,
by sector and job type, 2020-2030        68 Figure 23: Additional workers in the
Net Zero Scenario by occupation and skill level, 2020-2030      68 Module 4:
Just Energy Transition 1)  Introduction to the Energy Transition Landscape
Unprecedented floods in Pakistan, scorching heatwaves across Europe, record-
breaking rainfall in Australia, and the complete evacuation of Barbuda's
population after Hurricane Irma, along with the increasing coastal flood risks
faced by many Small Island Developing States (SIDS) due to rising sea levels,
continue to underscore the urgent challenges posed by extreme weather events.
These events offer a stark glimpse into the future if the climate crisis remains
unresolved. Scientific reports further emphasize the severity of the situation,
highlighting that global greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) have reached historical
highs, with the past seven years being the warmest on record. The
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Sixth Assessment Report
emphasizes the critical need to slash emissions to prevent irreversible harm to
human health, biodiversity, and the environment. Despite commitments made under
the Paris Agreement to limit global temperature rise to 1.5°C, the persistent
dominance of fossil fuels in the global energy mix poses a significant obstacle.
The need for a rapid energy transition is underlined by the fact that the
continued operation of existing fossil fuel infrastructure and the
infrastructure currently under construction will already lead to 1.65°C warming.
With the energy sector accounting for three-quarters of GHG emissions, urgent
and dramatic action is required to transition to a clean energy economy. This
transition is not only crucial for mitigating climate change but also for
addressing social justice, human rights, and economic concerns. This transition
represents a paradigm shift, not only in pivot away from fossil fuels towards
renewable and other clean energy sources but also in creating equitable access
to energy, fostering livelihood opportunities and enhancing overall well-being
for communities worldwide. As the world grapples with the imperative of
decarbonization, the challenges and opportunities inherent in this
transformation are profound, encompassing shifts in energy consumption patterns,
technological innovations, and policy frameworks aimed at steering the global
energy landscape toward sustainability. The substantial GHG emissions and the
resultant global climate change are one of the greatest sustainability
challenges confronting humanity today. Current trends show that despite
significant advancements in innovation and the deployment of low GHG emission
technologies, fossil fuels continue to dominate the global energy supply, not in
a small part due to legacy infrastructure. This trend has worsened since the
beginning of the current energy crisis in 2021 after the COVID-19 pandemic.
According to the estimations of the IEA and others like ‘Our World in Data’
fossil fuels represent over 80% of the global energy supply, while renewable
energy technologies (solar, wind, and hydro) cover about 5% as of 2021. This
matters because 675 million people (9% of the world population) do not have
access to electricity (2021) and 2.3 billion people (30% of the world) do not
have access to clean cooking fuels (2021). Without additional measures, it is
estimated that 660 million people, mostly in Sub-saharan Africa, would not have
access to electricity even in 2030. It also comes at large health costs related
to indoor air pollution, which results in at least 1.6 million premature deaths
each year. In addition, 4 billion people do not have access to social
protection, which can be concerning given that the energy transition will incur
costs on consumers. Globally, energy consumption is still on the rise in a world
of 8 billion people, given the increasing need of those without access. Energy
consumption also rises when people get richer. Historically, there are only a
few years where energy consumption did not rise, 2009 for example, due to the
global financial crisis, but also in the late 1990s during the Asian financial
crisis. Currently, global energy demand is expected to increase by 47% in the
next 30 years, driven by population and economic growth, particularly in
developing countries, a demand that can currently only be met based on fossil
fuels. Figure 1: Global Primary energy consumption by source (1800-2022) in
terawatt-hours Source: Energy Institute - Statistical Review of World Energy
(2023); Smil (2017) The cumulative impact of international conferences in
Stockholm, Rio, and Johannesburg emphasized the pivotal role of sustainable
energy development in global sustainability efforts. However, society’s
fundamental need for energy makes the decarbonization of energy systems more
challenging because additional energy sources have to meet the rising demand and
displace fossil fuels already in the energy mix. Countries have recognized this
trend and through the Paris Agreement have taken important steps to curtail GHG
emissions, striving to limit the increase in global average temperature to 1.5°C
above preindustrial levels. The share of low-carbon energy is increasing and
with 480 GW installed renewable capacity 2023 has been a record year. However,
the GHG emission curves are not yet bending, and progress is not fast enough to
slow climate change. Real progress is determined by the collective absolute
consumption and burning of fossil fuels in the global energy mix, and both are
still rising. One of the reasons that the energy mix remains dominated by fossil
fuels is that heavy transport, heating, and industrial sectors are harder to
decarbonize than electricity. Transport relies heavily on oil, and heating on
gas. The industrial supply chain relies heavily on fossil fuels as feedstock,
e.g., chemicals, pharmaceuticals, medical, but also as a source of high energy
and heat, which are needed in several energy intensive industries. In these
sectors, including the steel and cement sectors, reaching net-zero will require
increasing material efficiency, decarbonizing production processes, and
introducing/implementing policies to address market conditions, behavior, and
political economy challenges. Steel and cement are the most carbon-intensive
industrial materials on the planet – producing them accounts for 14-16% of
global energy-related CO2 emissions. In the electricity system, there are more
low-carbon options: hydropower, wind, solar, and nuclear. This means the
electricity mix tends to have a higher share of low-carbon sources, pointing
towards progress. Electricity rate determines decarbonization rates, requiring
massive increases in renewable and nuclear energy generation to make up for the
rising demand. Figure 2: Evolution of Global Primary Energy Consumption by
Source (1920-2022) in relative values Source: Energy Institute - Statistical
Review of World Energy (2023); Smil (2017) The transition from fossil fuels to
clean and sustainable energy sources is a critical step towards mitigating
climate change and achieving net-zero carbon emissions. In addressing these
challenges, sustainable transition strategies typically encompass three key
technological shifts: energy conservation on the demand side, enhanced
generation efficiency at the production level, and the substitution of fossil
fuels with various renewable and low-carbon energy sources. To ensure the
technical and economic viability of this transition, policy initiatives are
imperative for guiding the global electricity shift toward a sustainable energy
and electricity system. The adoption of large-scale renewable energy initiatives
necessitates measures aimed at enhancing the efficiency of existing nonrenewable
sources, which still play a vital role in cost reduction and stabilization. This
comprehensive approach is critical to maintaining the feasibility and benefits
of the transition, steering the global energy landscape toward sustainability.
This module will examine the compelling motivations for transitioning to clean
energy, driven by environmental imperatives as well as social equity goals.
Beyond reducing emissions and enhancing energy security, it emphasizes ensuring
that clean energy benefits all, particularly marginalized communities. By
prioritizing accessibility, economic empowerment, and energy democracy, this
just transition seeks to build a more inclusive and resilient future. 1.1. The
energy transition in context An energy transition represents a significant
structural shift in an energy system concerning both supply and consumption
patterns. Historically, transitions have marked pivotal moments in societal
development, such as the industrial revolution's shift from wood and biomass to
coal, oil, and more recently, natural gas. However, in the modern context, the
term "energy transition" has evolved to encompass climate change mitigation
efforts, emphasizing the imperative to transition to sustainable energy sources
and reduce the energy intensity of our residential, commercial, and industrial
energy use. This transition is driven by the recognition that GHG emissions must
be reduced to zero, necessitating the replacement of fossil fuels within a net-
zero emission framework. Beyond mere technological advancements, the energy
transition also entails a reorientation of energy policy, encompassing shifts
from centralized to distributed generation, energy conservation measures,
increased efficiencies, and a democratization of energy. Unlike previous
transitions that unfolded over decades, the current energy transition demands
unprecedented speed and scale, impacting all sectors of society. Moreover, the
current energy transition transcends mere technological and analytical shifts;
it represents a comprehensive transformation of economic systems globally.
Embedded within deeply ingrained habits and assumptions of infinite growth, this
transition challenges prevailing notions of societal separation from nature and
each other. To navigate this transition successfully, there must be a
fundamental shift in perception regarding the risks posed by continued reliance
on fossil fuels. Reforming governance structures is a critical prerequisite for
facilitating this transition effectively. Current governance arrangements often
focus on partial solutions, lacking the holistic and systemic approaches
necessary to drive change at the required pace and scale. Furthermore, the
concept of energy security extends beyond mere self-sufficiency and underscores
the value of mutually beneficial economic interdependence. In this sense, energy
security does not imply energy independence, which in today’s context of
globally integrated markets is mostly a mere political concept. Integrating
energy considerations into the broader framework of sustainable development, as
outlined in the 2030 Agenda, offers a comprehensive approach to addressing
global challenges. Embracing an interconnected perspective on energy systems,
encompassing supply, demand, conversion, and transmission, is essential for
fostering resilience and sustainability within and between regions and economic
sectors. This integrative approach reflects the complex and interconnected
nature of the modern energy landscape and underscores the importance of
collaborative efforts in shaping a sustainable energy future. 1.2. What is a
JUST energy transition? The concept of a just transition lacks a universally
accepted definition, resulting in varied perceptions across different countries
and regions. At its essence, a just transition embodies principles, processes,
and practices aimed at ensuring fairness, equity, and inclusivity throughout the
shift towards sustainable energy systems. This issue has gained prominence,
particularly in the context of energy transition discussions, with a primary
focus on reconciling the rapid adoption of low-carbon technologies with
development priorities across all governance levels. The concept of a just
transition initially emerged from a movement by US trade unions, emphasizing the
importance of protecting workers affected by environmental regulations. Today,
inclusivity extends beyond workers to encompass all segments of society impacted
by the transition, especially the historically disadvantaged groups, and other
vulnerable populations that might be left behind but for intentional policy and
programmatic efforts. This inclusive approach guarantees that the transition is
not only environmentally sustainable but also socially and economically just.
According to the International Labour Organization (ILO), a just transition
involves greening the economy in a manner that maximizes fairness and
inclusivity for all stakeholders. This approach aims to generate decent work
opportunities, leaving no one behind in the process. Implicit in the discourse
on just transition is the acknowledgment that transitions can be disruptive,
underscoring the necessity for intentional efforts to facilitate a smooth and
equitable transition for all involved parties. A growing body of research
highlights the varying definitions of just transition. In addition to labor-
oriented conceptions, just transition is also rooted in concepts of
environmental, climate, and energy justice. In this context, the meaning of
“just” in just transition relates to identifying and protecting communities that
have historically faced injustices from the current energy system. These
frameworks focus on four tenets of justice: procedural justice, distributional
justice, justice as recognition, and restorative justice. A just energy
transition is underpinned by a set of fundamental principles prioritizing
fairness, equity, and inclusivity. As outlined by the ILO, it involves greening
the economy while creating decent work opportunities and ensuring that no one is
left behind. It is crucial to emphasize fairness, ensuring that the burdens and
benefits of the transition are equitably distributed across society. Equity must
be integrated into policies and strategies, with inclusivity serving as a
guiding principle to engage every community, worker, and social group in
decision-making processes. It is imperative to develop a localized vision for a
just transition, considering the intricate interplay between the climate crisis
and a global landscape marked by historical, systemic, and escalating
inequalities. There exists a risk of adopting poorly defined or inadequately
contextualized concepts, potentially leading to misguided solutions. Hence,
there is a pressing need to shift the discourse away from its exclusive
placement within the international political economy toward proactive engagement
with national and local stakeholders, including businesses, workers, and the
government. This shift would entail investing in domestic and localized measures
to ensure a more effective and tangible impact. Box 1: The 8 core principles of
a Just Energy Transformation Set out by the <a
href="https://www.undp.org/energy/dialogues-and-alliances/alliance-just-energy-
transformation">Alliance for Just Energy Transformation</a> (AJET), the 8
principles of a Just Energy Transformation aim to outline a shared understanding
towards successful implementation of Just Transition policies worldwide, even as
the details of the transitions differ at national scales. 1)      Be fair;
protect the rights and needs of everyone, and respect values, without
privileging any one group over another. 2)       Ensure climate and energy
justice. 3)   Deliver energy access and development. 4)       Be comprehensive,
coherent, and transparent. 5) Include clearly defined, robust and inclusive
stakeholder engagement and social dialogue. 6)    Ensure justice, transparent
decision-making, and access to reliable information for all people impacted by
energy transitions. 7)       Be sustainable, ambitious, and consistent. 8)   Be
science-based. Source: <a href="https://www.undp.org/energy/publications/8-core-
principles-just-energy-
transformation">https://www.undp.org/energy/publications/8-core-principles-just-
energy-transformation</a> Recognizing the interconnected nature of social,
economic, and environmental factors is crucial. The urgency of addressing
climate change is intertwined with the need for socio-economic development and
environmental preservation. Hence, a holistic approach is essential to navigate
the complex challenges associated with the transition. Global energy challenges
extend beyond the energy sector, impacting various policy areas and exacerbating
societal fragility. In this context, achieving a just energy transition through
effective, accountable, and inclusive energy governance is crucial for
addressing immediate national development priorities, environmental concerns,
safeguarding human rights, and preserving social stability. 1.3. What can the
energy transition look like? The energy transition must be approached within the
context of the necessary change in energy access from 2022 to 2030 for all
humans in all parts of the world. The “energy transition space” is where we will
undertake integrated activities and overcome the barriers to provide universal
access to modern and affordable energy services. It is important to note that
the energy demand needed to support decent living standards for all is estimated
to be well below current average energy consumption, so this is not simply about
providing more energy, and hence the present energy transition therefore needs
to be inherently different from previous ones, which just added new sources of
fuel to meet ever-growing energy demand. The diagram below visualizes the
challenge. >A picture containing shape Description automatically generated<
Figure 3: Energy transition space State in 2022 In 2022, all energy access was
within the context of an infinite growth economic system, with three broad
categories of energy access (with the approximate % of the global population):
no energy = 10%; dirty energy = 80%; and clean energy = 10%. Necessary state by
2030 All energy is within the context of a risk-informed sustainable economic
system in which all humans have access to clean energy with a decent living
standard. 1.3.1. Decarbonization of the energy system – What is net zero?
Countries and companies have started setting net zero targets to combat climate
change. This approach is different from the Paris Agreement, which seeks to
limit global warming to well below 2°C, preferably to 1.5°C, compared to pre-
industrial levels. To achieve this long-term temperature goal, countries aim to
reach global peaking of GHG emissions as soon as possible to achieve a climate
neutral world by mid-century. In contrast, the net zero concept seeks to balance
GHG removal with GHG emissions, so that the overall net emissions are zero. This
approach is based on keeping all available clean energy technologies in the
energy mix through the combination with carbon capture, use and storage (CCUS)
and direct air capture (DAC). It assumes that developed nations will go emission
negative, so that the global south has more time to develop. Net zero approaches
are in general based on short-term low hanging fruit while developing system
changing solutions in the long-term. Recognized short-term measures to limit
global warming are: --  Increasing energy efficiency of systems (including
buildings and industry) --   Managing methane along the entire supply chain and
from cradle to grave for all fossil fuels -- Rapidly deploying CCUS --
Scaling up renewable energy solutions while phasing out fossil fuel alternatives
--     Scaling up other low- and net-zero energy alternatives --       Investing
in innovation and new solutions such as DAC. This essentially means that all the
technologies needed to achieve the necessary deep cuts in global emissions by
2030 already exist, and the policies that can drive their deployment are already
proven. Advanced batteries, hydrogen electrolyzers, and direct air capture and
storage are potentially impactful innovation opportunities but must not be the
primary focus of political will or investment if the deeper structural and
systemic transformations of the underlying economic system are to be pursued
immediately. It is necessary to develop a new approach that considers life cycle
analysis during the productive use of products and services. This is related to
carefully assessing supply chain emissions. >A diagram of a graph showing the
current policy Description automatically generated with medium confidence<
Figure 4: CO2 Emissions Per Year Required to Achieve Net-Zero by 2050 Source: <a
href="https://www.researchgate.net/publication/365421862_Towards_Responsible_and
_Informed_Ocean-Based_Carbon_Dioxide_Removal_Research_and_Governance_Priorities/
figures">https://www.researchgate.net/publication/365421862_Towards_Responsible_
and_Informed_Ocean-
Based_Carbon_Dioxide_Removal_Research_and_Governance_Priorities/figures</a> Yet,
with no global consensus as to who is responsible for emissions, and with new
technologies to offset carbon in their infancy, achieving net zero is proving to
be a heroic task. This is confirmed by many reports that are tracking progress.
For example, IEA’s World Energy Outlook 2022 (WEO 2022) shows that we are far
from a global net-zero scenario. The WEO 2022 emphasizes the problem that not
only are the targets set too low to achieve even the 1.5°C goal, but the
declared individual policy measures are not being implemented in a credible
manner. All nations are committed and are in the process of developing or
implementing approaches to achieving their interpretation of sustainable energy
and the 2030 Agenda. It is necessary that each nation recognize the perspectives
and the drivers of the others, that there is not a single approach but a
multitude of approaches. What truly matters is that the collective outcome
delivers the needed results and that this collective approach can achieve these
targets faster than individual national or sectoral actions. As the main
contributors to climate change, industrialized nations therefore have a duty to
help poorer countries avert the worst effects. Approximately 23 wealthy,
developed countries, including the U.S., Japan, and China, account for half of
all historical CO2 emissions, despite making up only 12% of the global
population. These emissions have led to around 1.1°C of global warming, driving
more extreme weather events. Developing countries and small island states are
experiencing some of the greatest economic losses from climate change as a
percentage of their GDP. For example, Bhutan faces severe risks from melting
glaciers and flash floods, despite having negligible emissions. The most
vulnerable countries, which have contributed the least to the problem, are now
seeking financial assistance to adapt to these climate hazards. During the 2022
climate conference, COP27, this was recognized by the agreement of a loss and
damage fund. It is important that these announcements are soon followed by
concrete action in sectors, including energy. 1.4. Challenges for a Just Energy
Transition Shifting away from fossil fuel extraction introduces numerous
challenges. These encompass technological hurdles, economic complexities, and
policy challenges associated with integrating renewable energy into existing
energy systems. The need for infrastructural changes, workforce retraining, and
policy adaptations makes the transition a multifaceted and intricate process.
Technological advancements are necessary to harness renewable energy
effectively, but economic considerations, such as the cost of transitioning
infrastructure, pose significant hurdles. Additionally, the formulation and
implementation of supportive policies are crucial for ensuring a seamless shift
from fossil fuels to sustainable alternatives. 1.4.1. Regional and Community
Dependence on Fossil Fuel Industries Historically, energy transitions were
driven by economic development and technological progress. The shift from wood
or manure to coal, oil, and gas was spurred by the demand for more affordable
and efficient energy sources in growing economies. However, the 21st-century
energy transition is distinctive. It is primarily motivated by the urgent global
commitment to reduce GHG emissions and address the challenges of providing
reliable and affordable energy access to the world's poorest populations. This
involves substantial reductions in fossil fuel usage, the cessation of fossil
fuel subsidies, increased investments in sustainable energy, greater production
of renewables, enhanced energy storage efficiency, improved overall energy
efficiency, the electrification of various sectors, and expanded utilization of
alternative fuels like green hydrogen particularly in heavy industries that are
difficult to decarbonize. Figure 5: Share of primary energy consumption from
fossil fuels, 2022 Measured as a percentage of primary energy, using the
substitution method. Source: <a href="https://ourworldindata.org/fossil-
fuels">OurWorldInData.org/energy</a>. Figure 6: Evolution of the Share of
Primary Energy Consumption from Fossil Fuels Across Global Regions (1965-2022)
Source: <a href="https://ourworldindata.org/fossil-
fuels">OurWorldInData.org/energy</a> based on Energy Institute - Statistical
Review of World Energy (2023). As illustrated in Figure 5, the majority of
countries still heavily rely on fossil fuels for their primary energy
consumption, with specific regions such as the Middle East maintaining nearly
100% reliance over the past five decades (refer to Figure 6). Consequently,
certain regions and communities are deeply entrenched in extractive industries
as the cornerstone of their economic stability. Abrupt transitions away from
fossil fuel extraction have the potential to disrupt local economies and
precipitate job losses, presenting significant challenges for communities that
have been historically reliant on these industries. The economic interdependence
on extractive sectors underscores concerns regarding potential social upheaval.
Disruptions in employment and shifts in economic dynamics can precipitate
community challenges, including heightened unemployment, increased poverty
rates, and amplified social tensions. Ensuring the management of these
transitions with sensitivity is imperative to mitigate the risk of exacerbating
existing social inequalities. Moreover, changes in local economies, driven by
the decline of traditional industries, can lead to economic uncertainties and
disparities. 1.4.2. Importance of Proactive Planning and Strategic Foresight The
energy transition faces significant challenges amidst what is arguably one of
the most pressing cost-of-living crises in recent memory, compounded by events
like the COVID-19 pandemic and the conflict in Ukraine. These crises have
heightened social and political polarization, fostering substantial
disinformation and distrust in science and governance. Without careful
navigation, the green transition could further exacerbate polarization and raise
questions about society's social contract. Global governance and geopolitical
factors significantly influence and impact the energy transition within
countries. Elements such as global interdependencies, technological disparities,
and dependencies on critical raw materials will shape the feasibility of a just
energy transition. Governments, industries, and communities play central roles
in developing and implementing inclusive strategies, emphasizing collaboration
to foster a just and smooth transition. Proactive planning is crucial to
effectively manage the complexities of the transition process. Governments,
industries, and communities must collaborate to anticipate challenges, devise
comprehensive strategies, and create a supportive environment for the shift
toward sustainable energy sources. Governments possess the capacity to reshape
existing structures and rectify inefficiencies to facilitate the transition. The
proactive development of fiscal, policy, and institutional frameworks is vital
for realizing developmental and climate objectives, fostering a more resilient
and equitable global environment. Physical infrastructure transformation is
essential for enhancing resilience and fostering flexibility in a diversified
and interconnected energy system. Upgrading, modernizing, and expanding
infrastructure, along with the widespread deployment of storage solutions, are
pivotal steps. Transmission and distribution mechanisms must adapt to
accommodate diverse trade routes, with proactive planning of interconnectors and
shipping routes being essential. There is ample evidence to show how low-income,
racially marginalized, and other vulnerable populations have historically
received disproportionately lower levels of infrastructure investments such as
grid strengthening or energy efficiency. A just transition strategy should
enable opportunities to correct for these inequities and ensure that everyone
has a right to affordable, reliable, healthy, and sustainable energy
infrastructure and services. Public acceptance and community involvement are
critical for large-scale initiatives, necessitating transparency in project
communication and opportunities for community input. Policy and regulatory
transformation should prioritize accelerating the energy transition and reducing
the role of fossil fuels, ensuring a substantial decrease in their share by mid-
century. Moreover, to build effective long-term planning and future preparedness
capabilities, it is also necessary to incorporate strategic foresight
methodologies. Proactive planning typically involves concrete steps and specific
actions to address known challenges or opportunities. It may be more reactive to
current circumstances. Strategic foresight and anticipatory governance, on the
other hand, take a broader and more holistic approach. They involve exploring a
range of possible futures, even those that may be uncertain or unexpected. It
often goes beyond immediate problem-solving to envision alternative scenarios
and potential paradigm shifts. Strategic foresight involves the systematic
examination of the future to foresee shifts, create potential transition routes,
and fortify resilience against shocks, all with the aim of guiding present
actions to shape the desired future. The primary objective of foresight is not
the prediction of specific events but rather to provide strategic early warnings
about potential occurrences, be they positive opportunities or negative shocks,
which might be concealed or on the horizon. Recognizing the finite nature of
resources for governments and multilateral organizations, and the need to make
strategic decisions on major policies and investments, it becomes crucial to
efficiently prepare for emerging global, regional, and local fragilities and
opportunities. This necessitates the utilization of systematic analysis,
accurate indicators, and measurements. The insights gained through this process
can, in turn, exert influence on various aspects such as structures, business
models, risk appetite, financing strategies, collaborations, organizational
culture, and operational agility. Within the context of the just energy
transition, strategic foresight allows navigation through the complexities of
this transformative journey. As nations strive to proactively plan for a
sustainable and equitable energy future, integrating foresight methodologies
permits effective long-term planning and preparedness. This is particularly
evident when considering the multifaceted challenges and opportunities
associated with the transition to renewable-driven energy systems. Strategic
foresight enables stakeholders in the energy transition to look beyond immediate
circumstances and explore diverse scenarios that may shape the future energy
landscape. Envisioning potential advancements in technology, changes in global
energy demand, or geopolitical shifts can guide decision-makers in anticipating
and adapting to emerging trends. For example, strategic foresight is a powerful
tool for anticipating future needs and disruptions in the context of physical
infrastructure transformation. It enables stakeholders to envision how evolving
technologies, such as advancements in energy storage or the integration of smart
grids, might impact the energy infrastructure. Moreover, foresight aids in
preparing for unexpected shifts in energy consumption patterns and the dynamic
requirements of decentralized renewable energy sources. By incorporating
foresight, governments, industries, and communities can move beyond reactive
responses to current challenges and instead proactively identify alternative
pathways and innovative solutions. For instance, Brazil has a long history of
energy technology foresight, carried out as part of national science and
technology future studies, as well as for the sector and certain energy
segments. Scenario analysis, along with Delphi studies, has been among the most
popular tools applied. These have played a crucial role in defining the
country’s energy prospects. 2)      Unintended Consequences of the Energy
Transition As the world shifts towards renewable energy sources, the energy
transition is not only pivotal for addressing climate change but also brings
about unintended consequences that adversely affect individuals, households, and
communities globally. These consequences often materialize in the form of
excessive burdens or a lack of access to opportunities arising from the
transition. In this section, we aim to explore and provide a comprehensive
review of how the energy transition directly impacts those on the frontlines.
The discourse on energy justice extends to the energy transition itself,
highlighting how low-carbon energy technologies also generate negative
externalities that are unfairly distributed among neighboring communities.
Examples include noise disturbances from wind turbines, as well as land-related
conflicts and concerns about water consumption in renewable energy projects.
Research consistently shows that these adverse impacts disproportionately affect
certain populations, with rural and underserved communities often bearing the
brunt, while urban populations reap a larger share of the benefits. While it is
essential to recognize the environmental and health benefits of transitioning
away from fossil fuels, it is equally crucial to acknowledge the negative
consequences of clean energy technology on local populations. These communities,
often predominantly comprised of indigenous communities, people of color and
low-income individuals, endure a range of health and environmental hazards
associated with fossil fuel extraction and use. Moreover, the convergence of
extractive industries and renewable energies represents a critical facet of the
global transition towards sustainable energy. Materials sourced from extractive
industries play a fundamental role in advancing renewable energy sources such as
solar, wind, and energy storage technologies. From the photovoltaic cells in
solar panels to the magnets in wind turbines, extractive industries provide the
elemental building blocks for these technologies. A staggering 54% of minerals
crucial for the energy transition are situated on or near indigenous peoples'
lands, emphasizing the importance of robust and early community engagement. As
Figure 7 illustrates, over 80% of lithium projects and more than half of nickel,
copper, and zinc projects are located within indigenous territories.
Additionally, more than a third of mineral projects essential for the energy
transition are situated on or near indigenous or farmers' lands facing water
risk, conflict, and food insecurity. For instance, over 90% of platinum reserves
and resources are situated on or near indigenous peoples' or rural lands
confronting these three risks, followed by molybdenum (76%) and graphite (74%).
>figure 1< Figure 7: a) Geographic distribution of mining projects. b)
Distribution of energy transition minerals and metals reserves and resources.
The selected 17 minerals and metals have the highest number of extractive
projects worldwide. Percentages at the top of the figure represent those for the
‘total combined Indigenous and peasants’ variable. The quest for critical
materials could potentially trigger geopolitical competition in regions known to
harbor significant deposits, such as the Arctic, outer space, and the deep sea.
The Arctic, renowned for its vast reserves of critical materials like nickel,
zinc, and rare earths, holds strategic importance due to its mineral abundance.
Given the substantial terrestrial reserves available, cautious approaches are
warranted concerning outer space and the deep sea, given uncertainties
surrounding potential environmental impacts and regulatory frameworks.
Extractive industries, indispensable for global energy production and economic
expansion, exert intricate and far-reaching impacts on the environment, society,
and economies. There exists an inherent synergy between extractive industries
and the advancement of sustainable energy sources. Thus, responsible extraction
practices are imperative to ensure a consistent supply of materials essential
for the renewable energy transition, underscoring the symbiotic relationship
between the two. In alignment with the objectives of a just energy transition,
upholding responsible extraction practices and promoting sustainable sourcing
are paramount. The interconnection between extractive industries and sustainable
energy underscores the importance of ethical considerations, environmental
stewardship, and social responsibility across the entire supply chain. Figure 8:
Minerals Essential for Renewable Energy Technologies Source: <a
href="https://www.iisd.org/publications/report/green-conflict-minerals-fuels-
conflict-transition-low-carbon-
economy">https://www.iisd.org/publications/report/green-conflict-minerals-fuels-
conflict-transition-low-carbon-economy</a> 1)   Critical Minerals and Materials
The rapid growth in demand for critical materials is anticipated as we
transition to a renewable energy-based future. According to IRENA's 1.5°C
Scenario, renewables are expected to constitute 91% of the energy mix by 2050,
leading to a significant surge in renewables-based installed capacity from 3,300
gigawatts (GW) in 2022 to a staggering 33,000 GW in 2050. This transformative
shift envisions 90% of all road vehicles being electric and hydrogen accounting
for 14% of total final energy consumption, necessitating an annual tripling of
new renewables, averaging 1,000 GW. This expansive development of sustainable
energy technology and infrastructure will substantially amplify the demand for
specific minerals and metals, collectively referred to as "critical materials."
The shift towards renewable energy sources relies heavily on critical minerals.
These minerals are vital components in clean energy technologies like solar
panels, wind turbines, and electric vehicle batteries. As the world transitions
away from fossil fuels, the demand for these critical minerals is expected to
soar, creating a crucial link between sustainable energy and the resources
needed to achieve it. As of now, there is no universally accepted definition of
critical materials, as their criticality depends on subjective and location-
specific factors. Core criteria include economic importance for a specific
economy, the level of supply risk influenced by factors such as scarcity,
proximity of supply, extraction and refining complexities, concentration of
supply across the value chain, and the absence of viable alternative sources.
Usually, the term encompasses minerals and metals crucial for a renewables-based
energy transition. Examples include, but are not limited to, cobalt, copper,
graphite, iridium, lithium, manganese, nickel, platinum, and selected rare earth
elements. These materials are at the center of global discussions and diplomatic
considerations, given their geographically concentrated production and
processing, raising concerns about resource security and geopolitical dynamics.
Emerging strategies aim to diversify supply and production chains, considering
various economic, political, and social factors. Figure 9: Global distribution
of mining and refining supply for selected critical materials, 2022. Source:
IRENA (2023) Figure 10: Distinguishing Characteristics between Fossil Fuels and
Critical Minerals Source: <a
href="https://www.irena.org/Publications/2023/Jul/Geopolitics-of-the-Energy-
Transition-Critical-
Materials">https://www.irena.org/Publications/2023/Jul/Geopolitics-of-the-
Energy-Transition-Critical-Materials</a> 1) Rising Demand and Implications From
2017 to 2022, the energy sector emerged as the primary driver behind a
remarkable tripling in the overall demand for lithium, accompanied by a 70%
surge in demand for cobalt, and a substantial 40% increase in demand for nickel.
This surge catapulted the market for energy transition minerals to a staggering
USD 320 billion in 2022, propelling it to the forefront of the global mining
industry with projections of continued rapid expansion. The escalating global
demand for critical materials presents a dual-edged sword, encompassing both
challenges and opportunities for countries engaged in their production. As the
demand escalates, countries find themselves at the crossroads of economic
opportunities and the imperative to address the environmental and social
ramifications associated with heightened extraction activities. On the one hand,
meeting the burgeoning demand for critical materials offers promising economic
prospects for producing countries. However, on the other hand, it introduces a
myriad of challenges pertaining to environmental sustainability, resource
governance, resource curse effects, and social impacts, underscoring the need
for a balanced and strategic approach to mineral extraction and utilization.
Figure 11: Demand for key materials and share of clean energy in total demand <a
href="https://www.iea.org/news/critical-minerals-market-sees-unprecedented-
growth-as-clean-energy-demand-drives-strong-increase-in-
investment">https://www.iea.org/news/critical-minerals-market-sees-
unprecedented-growth-as-clean-energy-demand-drives-strong-increase-in-
investment</a> The mining and processing landscape of critical materials reveals
a striking geographical concentration, with a handful of countries exerting
significant influence. As depicted in Figure 12, compiled by IRENA based on the
latest available data in 2023, countries such as Australia (lithium), Chile
(copper and lithium), China (graphite, rare earths), the Democratic Republic of
Congo (cobalt), Indonesia (nickel), and South Africa (platinum, iridium)
concentrate most of the critical minerals’ extraction sites. This concentration
intensifies further during the processing stage, with China currently
responsible for refining 100% of the natural graphite and dysprosium (a rare
earth element), 70% of cobalt, and close to 60% of lithium and manganese. The
concentration of critical materials production and processing in a select few
countries raises significant geopolitical and economic concerns. It underscores
the pressing need for global collaboration and strategic planning to ensure
equitable distribution, sustainable extraction practices, and fair resource
governance. As the demand for these materials continues to surge, it becomes
increasingly imperative for nations to navigate these complexities while
steadfastly advancing towards a just and sustainable energy transition. Figure
12: Key mining countries for select minerals. 2)       Environmental Impacts of
Mining Mining critical minerals for the energy transition presents significant
environmental challenges, contributing to widespread environmental degradation.
Practices like open-pit mining, mountaintop removal, and deforestation result in
land degradation and biodiversity loss. These activities disrupt ecosystems,
endangering plant and animal species and upsetting the delicate balance of
natural habitats. One major consequence of extractive industries is land
degradation, where mining and drilling processes cause significant harm.
Excavation and vegetation removal strip away fertile topsoil, impairing the
land's ability to support biodiversity and agriculture. The scars left by these
activities can endure for decades, impacting ecosystems and local communities
reliant on the land for their livelihoods. Deforestation is also a significant
issue associated with extractive industries. Timber extraction and land
clearance for mining contribute to widespread deforestation, reducing
biodiversity and disrupting ecosystem balance. This leads to soil erosion,
altered water cycles, and loss of habitats for numerous species, affecting
regional and global climate patterns. Habitat destruction is a critical concern
as extractive industries encroach upon natural habitats, displacing native flora
and fauna. This disruption results in biodiversity loss and disrupts crucial
ecological processes. Species reliant on specific habitats face heightened
vulnerability, leading to population declines and, in severe cases, extinction.
Protecting these habitats is crucial for maintaining ecosystem resilience and
balance. Moreover, mining activities contribute to air and water pollution,
posing significant environmental risks. The extraction, processing, and
transportation of minerals release pollutants into the air and water. Airborne
pollutants like particulate matter and greenhouse gases worsen air pollution and
climate change. Water pollution results from the release of toxic chemicals,
heavy metals, and sedimentation into water bodies, endangering aquatic
ecosystems and human health. The environmental impacts of mining critical
minerals emphasize the urgent need for sustainable practices and mitigation
measures to ensure a more environmentally responsible approach to meeting global
energy needs. Addressing these impacts can be challenging, requiring a
comprehensive strategy focused on minimizing, restoring, and, if necessary,
offsetting environmental damage. The goal is to achieve a net positive impact by
prioritizing actions such as avoidance, minimization, and restoration throughout
the mining process. 3)       Responsible Resource extraction The concept of
responsible resource extraction introduces the idea that extractive activities
can align with sustainability goals, emphasizing the need to balance economic
development with environmental and social considerations. Responsible resource
extraction involves ethical practices and strategic planning, ensuring that
economic development from extractive industries is achieved without compromising
environmental integrity or social well-being. Amidst the challenges facing the
mining industry, such as declining productivity and rising costs alongside
persistent environmental and social concerns, innovative solutions are urgently
needed to enhance positive outcomes while mitigating adverse effects. Public-
private partnerships, contingent on substantial political and business
commitment, emerge as a viable option to address these challenges effectively.
The Towards Sustainable Mining (TSM) standard is a globally recognized framework
that helps mining companies manage their environmental and social risks. It is
the first responsible mining standard to require site-level assessments with
external verification. This strategy fosters collaboration with stakeholders to
pursue shared objectives,￼￼ to collectively improve infrastructure, education,
health services, and capacity ￼. Similarly, the International Council on Mining
and Metals (ICMM) has collaborated with academic researchers to devise a matrix
approach aimed at identifying technological solutions aligning with six UN
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) for the mining sector. These initiatives
underscore the industry's growing recognition of the need for sustainable
practices and collaborative efforts to achieve them. In addition, the Initiative
for Responsible Mining Assurance (IRMA) Standard is an internationally
recognized, voluntary assurance program aimed at improving the social and
environmental performance of mining operations worldwide. The Standard is
designed to be independently auditable at the mining site level and is supported
by leading companies as well as civil society organizations. Despite the
implementation of corporate social responsibility frameworks and adherence to
environmental, social, and governance principles by many mining companies, there
remains a significant gap between established policies and their actual on-the-
ground impacts. A 2020 study conducted by the Responsible Mining Foundation,
which assessed 38 large-scale mining companies representing around 28% of global
mining production, revealed that 10 out of 12 companies associated with known
incidents of human rights violations had established formal human rights
policies. Similarly, 29 out of 30 companies reporting accidental workplace
fatalities had formal commitments to provide safe working conditions. This
underscores a significant disparity between established policies and the actual
on-the-ground impacts. A 2021 report from the Business & Human Rights Resource
Centre focused on 30 extractive companies in Eastern Europe and Central Asia,
highlighting the disconnect between comprehensive human rights policies and
actual performance. The study found that many companies with extensive policies
were associated with severe human rights allegations. For instance, seven out of
19 companies with human rights policies faced allegations related to deaths or
violence. While these studies do not exclusively focus on Critical Minerals
extraction for Energy Transition, their conclusions shed light on the broader
mining sector. Corporate commitments play a crucial role in setting standards,
but they alone prove insufficient to prevent harmful impacts and ensure a Just
Energy Transition. Current Status of Mining Sustainability The mining industry's
journey towards sustainability and responsible practices reveals a complex and
evolving landscape, marked by notable progress alongside persistent challenges.
While some companies have taken proactive measures to mitigate the environmental
and social impacts associated with their operations, the overall scenario
remains multifaceted. In 2023, the International Energy Agency (IEA) conducted
an assessment, delving into the environmental and social performance of 20 major
mining companies with a specific focus on energy transition minerals. Utilizing
publicly available sustainability reports as primary sources, this evaluation
shed light on notable achievements, particularly in community investment, worker
safety, and gender balance. However, despite commendable strides in these areas,
the pace of progress, especially regarding environmental sustainability, has
been sluggish. This indicates a lack of uniform advancement across various
dimensions, as illustrated in Figure 13. Figure 13: Gender, social, health and
safety indicators for selected mining companies Despite efforts to enhance
sustainability, environmental indicators continue to pose significant
challenges. GHG emissions remain stubbornly high, with minimal improvements
observed annually in emission levels per ton of mineral output. Additionally,
water withdrawals surged by approximately 10% from 2018 to 2021, reflecting
ongoing difficulties in resource conservation. Waste generation has fluctuated
around 5 Gt during the same period, with intensities slightly surpassing
previous levels in 2021. The variability in reporting practices among mining
companies underscores the need for greater consistency and breadth in
sustainability disclosures. While some companies provide detailed, granular
reports spanning several years and covering numerous categories, others offer
only high-level highlights, addressing a limited set of areas. Among all the ESG
dimensions considered, only a handful were disclosed by more than 15 companies.
Notably, total energy consumption and scope 1 and 2 GHG emissions were among the
most reported categories, whereas due diligence checks, fatalities, and waste
recycling displayed lower levels of disclosure. This variability highlights the
challenge of obtaining a comprehensive understanding of performance and tracking
progress over time. Consumer preferences for sustainably sourced minerals remain
uncertain, despite the availability of cleaner production pathways. While some
downstream companies show a preference for minerals with lower climate impacts,
broader adoption of sustainable practices in consumer behavior remains
questionable. Concerns persist about the genuine consideration of ESG factors in
consumers' sourcing and investment decisions, extending beyond the mining
industry. Diverse production pathways for critical minerals carry varying
environmental impacts. For example, the production of battery-grade nickel from
laterite resources is significantly more energy-intensive than sulfide-based
production routes. Similarly, synthetic graphite anodes exhibit higher emissions
than natural graphite anodes. Despite these differences, the Battery Materials
Review suggests that end users and investors may not consistently prioritize
cleaner production pathways in their decision-making. As stakeholders
increasingly demand detailed and transparent information on sustainability
performance, the mining industry faces mounting pressure to enhance reporting
practices, traceability systems, and product life cycle assessments. The
adoption of such systems hinges on the integration of ESG factors into supply
agreements and the genuine consideration of sustainability in consumer choices,
driving the industry towards a more sustainable future. Customers, aiming to
trace impacts across entire product life cycles, may soon require ESG
credentials through traceability systems or product/battery passports. The
adoption of such systems hinges on how ESG factors influence supply agreements.
Questions persist regarding the genuine consideration of ESG factors in
consumers' sourcing and investment decisions, extending beyond the mining
industry. Diverse production pathways carry varying environmental impacts. For
instance, the production of battery-grade nickel from laterite resources,
converting nickel pig iron to matte, is significantly more energy-intensive than
the sulfide-based production route. Moreover, synthetic graphite anodes exhibit
higher emissions than natural graphite anodes. Despite the availability of
cleaner production pathways, the Battery Materials Review indicates that end
users and investors may not necessarily prioritize them in their decision-
making, although some battery manufacturers have initiated emissions tracking in
their supply chain, showing a preference for minerals with a lower climate
impact. 2)       Environmental Concerns of Clean Energy Technology Deployment As
the global transition to renewable energy gains momentum in response to climate
change and the need to reduce dependence on fossil fuels, it becomes
increasingly crucial to thoroughly assess the environmental impacts associated
with these renewable energy technologies. A key aspect of this evaluation
involves comparing the lifecycle GHG emissions of different energy technologies.
Lifecycle assessments offer insights into the total carbon footprint of energy
sources, encompassing emissions throughout their entire lifecycle, including
extraction, manufacturing, transportation, and disposal. Figure 14 presents the
findings of a lifecycle GHG assessment conducted by UNECE (2022) for different
electricity generation technologies. It underscores that while all electricity
generation methods produce GHG emissions, fossil fuels demonstrate notably
higher emissions intensity compared to renewable energies. The primary objective
of this study is to assess the environmental impacts associated with delivering
1 kWh of electricity to a grid on a global average scale for the year 2020. This
analysis focuses exclusively on the functional unit of electricity delivery and
excludes considerations related to load balancing systems such as storage
elements and additional grid connections. The study aims to compare various
electricity-generating technologies, encompassing coal and natural gas, both
with and without carbon dioxide capture and storage, as well as wind power
(onshore and offshore), solar power (including photovoltaics, polycrystalline,
and thin-film technologies), concentrated solar power, hydropower, and
conventional nuclear power. The complexity involved in modeling the diverse
feedstock-agricultural practices-conversion-technology combinations associated
with biomass has led to its intentional exclusion from this assessment. While
biomass represents a significant renewable energy source, its environmental
impacts vary widely based on factors such as feedstock type, agricultural
practices, and conversion technologies. For instance, studies like Gibon and
Hertwich (2017) have underscored the substantial variation in impact among
different biomass feedstocks, such as forest residues and purpose-grown energy
crops. The sensitivity of biomass impacts to parameters like irrigation and
agricultural practices necessitates detailed regional-level modeling for
accurate assessment. However, the environmental considerations surrounding
renewable energy generation extend beyond GHG emissions alone. While renewable
energy sources like solar and wind power offer cleaner alternatives to fossil
fuels, they present environmental challenges related to land use, habitat
disruption, water consumption, and materials extraction. These broader
environmental impacts demand thorough examination and consideration as we
navigate the transition to renewable energy. In this section, we delve deeper
into these environmental concerns associated with renewable energy generation to
gain a comprehensive understanding of its ecological impact. >A graph of gas
emissions Description automatically generated with medium confidence< Figure 14:
Lifecycle greenhouse gas emission ranges for different technologies Source: Life
Cycle Assessment of Electricity Generation Options. UNECE (2022) <a
href="https://unece.org/sed/documents/2021/10/reports/life-cycle-assessment-
electricity-generation-
options">https://unece.org/sed/documents/2021/10/reports/life-cycle-assessment-
electricity-generation-options</a> 1)       Wind Turbines Impacts Wind power
stands out as a low-impact alternative to traditional energy sources like fossil
fuels and nuclear power generation, with minimal GHG emissions. Nonetheless, the
widespread deployment of wind turbines has sparked apprehensions regarding its
environmental implications, particularly concerning human well-being and local
ecosystems. Wind projects may disrupt habitats and contribute to soil erosion
through construction and land use alterations. Further, the proximity of wind
turbines to residential areas can result in various adverse effects on human
life, notably disturbances arising from noise levels and visual impacts. The
noise generated by wind turbines, categorized into aerodynamic and mechanical
types, has sparked debate. While the impact of mechanical noise lacks definitive
evidence, its low-frequency nature may disrupt human lives. Research conducted
by Miller and Keith (2018)￼ has established a correlation between wind turbine
sound pressure levels and adverse effects on nearby residents, potentially
leading to sleep disorders and hearing loss. Furthermore, the low-frequency
aerodynamic noise from wind turbines may pose health risks, including harm to
the vestibular system. Proposed mitigation measures include siting turbines at
least 2 km away from residential areas or optimizing house construction to
minimize interference The proliferation of wind power installations has prompted
concerns about local climate variations, exemplified by instances such as
droughts reported in Inner Mongolia. Studies carried out in wind-rich regions
like the San Gorgonio wind zone indicate that large turbines can influence local
temperatures. Although the severity of these effects necessitates further
observation, simulations suggest that they are predominantly regional rather
than global in scope. Environmental engineers have also raised concerns about
turbulence around turbines and its potential contribution to long-distance
climate changes. As wind plants continue to proliferate, continuous monitoring
and advanced research are essential to ensure that wind power remains a
sustainable and environmentally friendly electricity source in the future.
Further, wind turbines can pose a collision risk to migrating birds, especially
during peak migration seasons when billions of birds fill the skies. The
spinning blades can be particularly hazardous in areas of high winds, where
migratory routes converge. Researchers have proposed various solutions to
mitigate this issue. One effective method involves improving blade visibility by
painting them black or with black and white stripes, significantly reducing bird
fatalities. Additionally, using artificial intelligence to detect approaching
birds and powering down turbines to prevent collisions is another innovative
approach. By implementing these strategies and carefully siting wind farms to
avoid high-risk areas for bird collisions, the impact of wind energy development
on migrating birds can be minimized while still harnessing the benefits of
renewable energy. 2)       Impacts of Solar Power The environmental impact of
solar energy encompasses various factors, notably land use and the presence of
hazardous materials in manufacturing processes. While solar power offers
renewable energy potential, concerns persist regarding its efficiency,
particularly with photovoltaic (PV) cells and thermal solar energy
concentration. Solar power generation requires large areas of land for solar
panel installations, potentially leading to habitat destruction and loss of
biodiversity. Reports indicate that solar systems, including PV and Concentrated
Solar Power (CSP), have high energy land-use intensity compared to other energy
technologies, with projected substantial land requirements for future growth.
Innovative approaches like dual-angle solar arrays may mitigate land use impact.
Water usage varies depending on plant design and cooling technology, with CSP
plants requiring significant amounts of water for cooling, albeit with
alternatives like dry cooling to reduce consumption. Moreover, the PV
manufacturing process akin to most clean energy technology involves hazardous
materials like acids and chemicals, posing risks to workers and potential
environmental threats if not handled and disposed of properly. Additionally,
thin-film PV cells contain more toxic materials, emphasizing the importance of
proper management to avoid environmental and health hazards. 3)    Hydropower
Impacts The environmental impacts of hydropower, particularly concerning the
construction of large storage or pumped storage plants, are significant and
multifaceted. One prominent consequence is the alteration of natural river
systems, where blocking or diverting river flows disrupts vital migration routes
for fish. This interruption poses a severe threat to fish populations, hindering
their ability to reach breeding grounds and leading to a decline in overall
numbers. Despite attempts to mitigate these effects using fish ladders, these
solutions often fall short of adequately supporting fish migrations. Moreover,
the damming of rivers frequently results in diminished downstream water and
sediment flows, depriving wildlife of essential habitats and nutrients. This
disruption not only threatens the biodiversity of river ecosystems but also
undermines the well-being of downstream animal populations reliant on these
resources. Furthermore, the creation of reservoirs associated with hydropower
plants further exacerbates environmental concerns by altering surrounding
landscapes and ecosystems. Upstream flooding caused by reservoir construction
not only displaces wildlife but also disrupts scenic areas and valuable
agricultural land, potentially necessitating human resettlement. Additionally,
reservoirs act as carbon sinks, trapping organic matter that decomposes and
releases greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and methane into the water.
While hydroelectric plants themselves do not directly emit greenhouse gases
during operation, the life-cycle emissions associated with reservoir creation
can be substantial, particularly in tropical areas or temperate peatlands where
decomposition rates are higher. This underscores the importance of carefully
considering the environmental ramifications of hydropower projects and adopting
site-specific mitigation strategies to minimize their ecological footprint. 4)
Mitigating Environmental Harm Mitigating the environmental harms of clean enegry
technology requires a multifaceted approach that encompasses responsible
resource extraction, innovative technologies, and robust regulatory frameworks.
By promoting sustainable mining practices, governments and industry stakeholders
can minimize these adverse effects and safeguard ecosystems. Further,
investments in technological innovation are crucial for reducing the
environmental footprint of renewable energy technologies. Advancements in
manufacturing processes, such as the development of cleaner production methods
and recycling technologies, can help minimize resource consumption and waste
generation. Additionally, research into alternative materials and energy storage
solutions can further enhance the sustainability of renewable energy systems.
Effective regulatory frameworks play a vital role in mitigating environmental
harm associated with renewable energy development. Governments must enact and
enforce policies that promote environmental conservation, regulate extractive
industries, and incentivize sustainable practices. By setting stringent
environmental standards and providing incentives for renewable energy projects
with minimal ecological impact, policymakers can ensure that the energy
transition aligns with environmental sustainability goals. Mitigating
environmental harm requires collaboration among various stakeholders, including
governments, industry, academia, and civil society. Stakeholder engagement is
essential for identifying environmental risks, developing mitigation strategies,
and fostering transparency and accountability in the renewable energy sector. By
working together, stakeholders can address environmental challenges holistically
and ensure the long-term sustainability of renewable energy development. 3)
Human Rights and Socio-Economic Impacts Amidst the undeniable environmental
advantages, the widespread adoption of renewable energy technologies brings to
light nuanced challenges pertaining to human rights and socio-economic dynamics.
Recognizing and proactively addressing these complexities are paramount for
ensuring an equitable and just transition towards renewable energy sources.
Renewable energy projects frequently necessitate land acquisition, prompting
concerns over the displacement of communities and alterations in land use. These
processes raise complex questions regarding the rights of affected individuals
and communities. Furthermore, the extraction of critical minerals and materials
vital for renewable energy technologies can trigger adverse human rights
implications, encompassing labor rights violations (see Figure 14 for example)
and environmental degradation within mining areas. Beyond environmental
considerations, sometimes the deployment of renewable energy projects
considerably impacts the socio-economic fabric of local communities and regions.
While such initiatives hold promise in generating new employment avenues,
reducing air pollution, and catalyzing economic expansion, they may concurrently
foster social upheaval, income disparities, and conflicts over land and
resources. Additionally, the distribution of benefits derived from renewable
energy projects is not always equitable, with marginalized communities often
bearing a disproportionate burden of associated costs and risks. >A map of the
world with different colored dots Description automatically generated< Figure
15: Documented human rights and energy conflicts around the globe. Black: Fossil
Fuel Related Conflicts. Brown: Biomass and Land Conflicts (includes forests,
agriculture, and livestock management). Blue: Water Management Conflicts.
Yellow: Nuclear Related Conflicts Source: Environmental Justice Atlas. <a
href="https://ejatlas.org/">https://ejatlas.org/</a> 1)     Human Rights
Concerns Renewable energy projects are often heralded as a solution for climate
change and the transition away from fossil fuels. However, they can come with a
range of ethical and sustainability challenges that need to be navigated to
ensure a fair and equitable shift to renewable energy sources. A central ethical
dilemma inherent in these endeavors revolves around their dependence on
extractive industries, necessary for sourcing critical minerals and materials
vital for renewable energy technologies. Yet, these industries also present
significant challenges regarding human rights, indigenous rights, and
environmental justice. Balancing economic development with ethical
considerations becomes paramount for responsible resource management. Similar
concerns have been made around oil, gas and coal extraction, which also often
creates significant negative social and environmental impacts. Human rights
concerns loom large over renewable energy projects, particularly concerning land
acquisition, community displacement, and labor rights violations. The extraction
of critical minerals often disrupts ecosystems, resulting in habitat destruction
and potential health hazards for local populations. Upholding and protecting the
fundamental rights of individuals impacted by these activities is pivotal for
ethical renewable energy development. As we progress with the transition to
clean energy, it is crucial to pause and reflect on whether we have adequately
assessed the human rights and social implications accompanying this transition.
The unsettling issue of land dispossession affecting indigenous communities in
regions designated for renewable energy and critical mineral mining projects can
have severe repercussions, jeopardizing livelihoods and disrupting access to
vital resources like food. Take, for instance, the production of lithium-ion
batteries, which power our electronic devices and vehicles, presents its own set
of challenges. Minerals such as lithium, cobalt, and nickel, crucial for these
batteries, are often sourced through practices that disregard human rights and
environmental well-being. In regions like the Democratic Republic of Congo
(DRC), communities face forced evictions, child labor, and dangerous working
conditions in mines. Indigenous communities in areas like the Salar de Atacama
also face threats to their rights and ecosystems due to lithium extraction. On
the other hand, we have examples such as Albemarle, a specialty chemicals
company, which has voluntarily shared 3.5% of its Chilean operations revenues
with the Atacama Indigenous Council since 2017. The rush to find new sources of
battery minerals through practices like deep-sea mining poses severe risks to
the environment and coastal communities. It's crucial for companies involved in
sourcing these minerals to respect human rights and remedy any abuses associated
with their operations or business relations. Looking ahead, projections from the
World Energy Outlook underscore a growing intersection between renewable energy
needs and human rights concerns. Mary Robinson, former UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights, emphasizes the importance of recognizing that actions beneficial
for the planet may not always align with the well-being of people. Hence, a just
transition is imperative, one where human rights considerations are intricately
woven into all climate actions. This highlights the need for energy policies to
be crafted with a nuanced understanding of trade-offs, co-benefits, and
competing priorities, balancing energy security and climate objectives with the
human rights of stakeholders, including local communities and workers. At the
project implementation level, renewable energy initiatives must be meticulously
planned, financed, constructed, and integrated into energy systems with a keen
eye on human rights, especially in areas where vulnerable communities reside.
There are positive developments in this direction. Many renewable project
developers demonstrate effective community engagement and consultation,
championing community investment programs and advocating for community ownership
of projects. Furthermore, major players in the global energy arena are beginning
to prioritize human rights, evident in their establishment of human rights
policies and the integration of social and environmental considerations into
energy investment decisions. Additionally, the engineering and construction
sectors are actively addressing human rights challenges through collaborative
efforts, as documented in a recent study by the Business and Human Rights
Resource Centre. Indigenous communities, often residing in areas rich in
renewable energy resources, face heightened risks of rights violations.
Extractive practices can encroach upon indigenous lands, jeopardizing cultural
heritage, livelihoods, and land connections. Respecting and upholding indigenous
rights are not only an ethical imperative but also pivotal for fostering
sustainable and inclusive renewable energy initiatives. Furthermore,
environmental justice considerations demand equitable distribution of both the
benefits and harms associated with renewable energy projects. Ensuring fair
treatment and representation of these communities is essential for mitigating
social disparities and promoting environmental equity. Collaboration at the
global level is essential to establish and enforce international standards
guiding responsible resource management in renewable energy production.
Ultimately, transitioning to sustainable alternatives is indispensable for
reducing reliance on extractive industries and fostering ecological and social
sustainability in renewable energy projects. Embracing renewable energy sources,
promoting circular economies, and exploring innovative technologies are key
components of this transition. By addressing ethical dilemmas and sustainability
challenges, renewable energy projects can contribute to a more equitable and
sustainable future for all. In conclusion, the energy transition must not be
facilitated by human exploitation, dispossession, and environmental harm.
Governments and businesses have an opportunity to shape an energy transition
that ends rather than replicates the injustices of a fossil fuel-based economy.
By prioritizing respect for human rights and environmental protection,
stakeholders can prevent abuses and promote sustainability in the renewable
energy value chain. Box 2: The Escazú Agreement The Escazú Agreement represents
a pivotal response to enduring challenges in environmental protection and human
rights across Latin America and the Caribbean. Despite efforts to engage
Indigenous women and men in decision-making processes, their participation often
remains superficial, while environmental defenders face alarming levels of
violence, making the region the most dangerous for such activities. The
agreement, supported by the Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean (ECLAC) and signed by 24 countries, aims to address these issues by
bridging the gap between human rights and environmental defense. Its core
objective is to impose obligations on member states to protect environmental
human rights defenders and promote a comprehensive four-pillar model of
environmental democracy. At the heart of the Escazú Agreement is a commitment to
recognizing the crucial role of environmental defenders and ensuring their
safety and empowerment. By emphasizing principles of environmental democracy,
including access to information, public participation in decision-making, access
to justice, and environmental education, the agreement fosters transparent,
accountable, and equitable governance in environmental affairs. In essence, the
Escazú Agreement serves as a powerful tool for advancing environmental
sustainability, social equity, and human rights in the region, offering hope for
a more inclusive and sustainable future for all, particularly Indigenous
communities and women. 2)    Social Impacts on Communities Renewable energy
projects, much like extractive activities, have far-reaching social implications
that extend beyond their operational sites, profoundly shaping the fabric of
communities and societies. One significant social challenge associated with
renewable energy projects is the potential displacement of communities.
Establishing renewable energy infrastructure, such as wind farms or
hydroelectric dams, may require the relocation of entire communities, leading to
the disintegration of established social structures and ties to ancestral lands.
Displacement can result in the loss of homes, cultural heritage, and community
cohesion, triggering social upheaval and challenges in adapting to new
environments. Moreover, renewable energy projects can impact traditional
livelihoods closely tied to the local environment. Communities relying on
agriculture, fishing, or other traditional occupations may face disruption due
to changes in land use, alterations in ecosystems, or conflicts over resource
access. This disruption can lead to economic instability, loss of cultural
practices, and challenges in maintaining intergenerational knowledge transfer.
Issues of social equity become pronounced in renewable energy developments, with
potential disparities in the distribution of benefits and burdens. Vulnerable
and marginalized groups may bear the brunt of negative impacts, exacerbating
existing social inequalities. Additionally, renewable energy projects can
threaten cultural heritage, as sacred sites, traditional practices, and
indigenous knowledge may be compromised or lost. The overall well-being of
communities is intricately linked to the social dynamics influenced by renewable
energy projects. Changes in living conditions, access to resources, and
disruptions to social cohesion can impact mental and physical health. Ensuring
community well-being involves addressing not only the immediate economic aspects
but also the broader social dimensions that contribute to a sense of security,
belonging, and cultural identity. Acknowledging and addressing the social
consequences of renewable energy projects require a comprehensive approach that
prioritizes the well-being of affected communities. This includes involving
communities in decision-making processes, acquiring free and prior informed
consent, implementing measures to minimize negative social impacts, enforcing
legal frameworks that safeguard the rights of affected communities, and
encouraging renewable energy companies to engage in responsible practices.
Recognizing and addressing issues of social equity, cultural heritage
preservation, and community well-being are crucial for sustainable renewable
energy development. Projects must be conducted with sensitivity to the unique
social fabric of affected communities, ensuring that benefits are shared
equitably, and negative impacts are minimized. Box 3: The Ethical Dilemma of
Extractive Industries and Infrastructure Projects In the context of Indigenous
peoples and peasants, culture and heritage serve as enduring connections to the
land, integral to their claims and aspirations for self-determination and
nation-building. However, in numerous mining jurisdictions, governmental
priorities often favor the macro-economic benefits of mining, sometimes at the
expense of cultural and historical sites, leading to the irreversible loss of
significant heritage. A notable case highlighting this issue unfolded in 2020 in
the Pilbara region of Western Australia. Here, Rio Tinto's expansion of an iron
ore mine resulted in the legal destruction of two ancient and sacred caves in
the Juukan Gorge. Despite their immense historical and cultural value, these
caves, home to artifacts linked genetically to the present-day traditional
owners, the Puutu Kunti Kurrama and Pinikura peoples, were not listed on the
national heritage register. Consequently, a state minister granted pre-approval
for their demolition, epitomizing the disregard for irreplaceable heritage in
favor of industrial interests. In Western Australia, approvals for heritage
destruction are often facilitated through negotiated agreements, wherein
traditional owners may receive monetary compensation in exchange for waiving
their statutory rights and refraining from impeding the destruction of their
heritage. However, this practice not only perpetuates local economic dependence
but also perpetuates the loss of irreplaceable heritage and stifles Indigenous
voices. Beyond mining, the construction of hydroelectric projects, exemplified
by endeavors such as the Belo Monte dam in Brazil and HidroItuango in Colombia,
also raises significant concerns regarding heritage preservation. These projects
often involve the inundation of vast areas, including ancestral lands, sacred
sites, and cultural artifacts, profoundly impacting Indigenous communities and
their cultural identity. The Belo Monte dam in the Brazilian Amazon is a prime
example. While it was supposed to have an installed capacity of 11,181 MW, it
currently produces an average of 4,500 MW. This project was highly controversial
because it aimed to submerge over 6,100 km2 of rainforest (later reduced to 516
km2 due to social pressure) and regulate the Xingu River’s flow, resulting in
the forced displacement of thousands of indigenous and riparian people.
Similarly, the Hidroituango megaproject in Colombia is projected to generate
2,400 MW of electricity. However, its environmental impact study cites 24
negative impacts (compared to only three positive ones), such as habitat loss
and fragmentation, increased pressure on natural resources, the proliferation of
disease vectors, and the forced displacement of indigenous and peasant
populations. These actions underscore the inherent tensions between
sustainability objectives. While resources like iron ore may be crucial for
economic growth, their extraction can jeopardize other vital objectives and
rights. Similarly, hydroelectric projects like the Belo Monte dam and
HidroItuango, though touted for their renewable energy potential, often come at
the cost of irreversible environmental and social consequences, including
habitat loss, increased resource pressure, and forced displacement of Indigenous
and peasant populations. 3) Economic Ramifications Renewable energy sources
herald not only a mere shift in energy production but a profound overhaul of
global economies. This transformation brings forth a myriad of economic and
social implications, spanning from potential job displacement to economic shocks
and regional disparities. In navigating these challenges successfully,
comprehensive just transition planning becomes imperative, aimed at mitigating
adverse effects on workers, communities, and regions alike. Central to
comprehending the economic landscape of this transition is recognizing the
enduring role of extractive industries. While these industries are pivotal for
driving economic growth and meeting global resource demands, they introduce a
complex array of both positive and negative consequences. Notably, they often
exacerbate income inequality by unevenly distributing benefits, leaving workers
susceptible to job instability while substantial wealth is accumulated by a
handful of actors. This inequality is particularly stark in resource-dependent
nations, where the reliance on natural resources intensifies existing
disparities, impacting poverty rates and overall human development (see Figure
16). >A graph of a graph of a graph of a graph of a graph of a graph of a graph
of a graph of a graph of a graph of a graph of a graph of a graph of Description
automatically generated< Figure 16: Poverty and HDI in relation to dependence on
extractive industries. Source: <a href="https://info.undp.org/docs/pdc/Documents
/H70/Extractives%20Global%20Initiative%20Final%20ProDoc%20Signed%202013%20FINAL.
pdf">https://info.undp.org/docs/pdc/Documents/H70/Extractives%20Global%20Initiat
ive%20Final%20ProDoc%20Signed%202013%20FINAL.pdf</a> Furthermore, the
concentration of extractive activities in specific regions often precipitates
pronounced regional economic imbalances. While areas hosting extraction sites
may undergo economic prosperity, neighboring regions may languish in neglect
with limited avenues for economic development. Additionally, the vulnerability
of resource-dependent economies to commodity price volatility poses significant
challenges. Sudden drops in prices can instigate economic downturns, impacting
government revenue and impeding long-term economic planning efforts. Despite
their significant economic contributions, the extraction process can result in
irreversible damage, particularly through unsustainable practices that lead to
ecosystem destruction. Such impacts are especially pronounced in indigenous
communities reliant on the environment for their livelihoods, necessitating
responsible resource management practices for the benefit of present and future
generations. Among the negative economic impacts associated with extractive
industries are: --   Income Inequality: Despite their positive contributions,
extractive industries can exacerbate income inequality due to uneven
distribution of benefits. This can stem from unequal access to employment
opportunities, inadequate revenue-sharing mechanisms, and limited economic
diversification. Such dynamics are anticipated to intensify inequality in
resource-dependent nations, further underscoring the correlation between natural
resource dependence and heightened inequality. . --       Regional Economic
Disparities: Extractive activities tend to concentrate in specific regions,
resulting in pronounced regional economic imbalances. While areas hosting
extraction sites may experience economic booms, neighboring regions may face
neglect, limited economic development, and environmental externalities. --
Commodity Price Volatility: Resource-dependent economies are susceptible to
fluctuations in commodity prices, which can lead to economic downturns,
affecting government revenue and causing fiscal challenges. Such volatility can
impede long-term economic planning and investment. --       Resource Curse
Phenomenon: The "resource curse" refers to situations where resource-rich
countries encounter economic challenges such as corruption, governance issues,
and slow economic diversification. Over-reliance on extractive industries can
hinder the development of other sectors, rendering economies vulnerable to
external market forces. 3)     Ensuring a Just Transition for Workers and
Affected Communities As discussed previously, efforts to mitigate climate change
often carry unintended consequences that disproportionately affect vulnerable
populations. For instance, while reducing deforestation may lead to emissions
reductions, it can also disempower Indigenous peoples and local communities by
depriving them of forest-based livelihoods. Similarly, the transition to
renewable energy may result in spikes in energy and commodity prices,
disproportionately impacting poor households. According to the International
Labour Organization (ILO), while efforts to limit global warming could create
millions of new jobs worldwide, the transition away from fossil fuels may also
lead to the loss of millions of jobs in the energy sector by 2030. These
transitions necessitate careful management by governments, especially in a
globalized world where climate policies can reverberate across borders,
affecting economies and communities worldwide. Governments face numerous
challenges in managing these transitions, including concerns about increased
production costs leading to industries relocating abroad. History underscores
the importance of justice, inclusivity, and transparency in navigating such
transformations, as seen in movements like the "yellow vest" protests in France
triggered by proposed green taxes. A green transition to a net-zero future is
crucial for achieving the global climate goals outlined in the Paris Agreement,
but it must be accompanied by policies that prioritize equity and fairness.
Despite variations in its interpretation, the principles of a just transition
advocate for greening the economy in a fair and inclusive manner, creating
decent work opportunities, and leaving no one behind. As countries grapple with
the challenges of transitioning to a low-carbon future, it is imperative to
adopt frameworks that promote the principles, processes, and practices of a just
transition, ensuring that the path to sustainability is equitable and
sustainable for all. Box 4: IPCC’s 11 elements of a just transition. The IPCC
defined 11 elements of a just transition in its 2022 Global Assessment Report:
1)       Investments in establishing low-emission and labor-intensive
technologies and sectors. 2)       Research and early assessment of the social
and employment impacts of climate policies. 3)      Social dialogue and
democratic consultation of social partners and stakeholders. 4)     Creation of
decent jobs; active labor markets policies; and rights at work. 5)  Fairness in
energy access and use. 6)   Economic diversification based on low carbon
investments. 7)    Realistic training/retraining programs that lead to decent
work. 8)     Gender-specific politics that promote equitable outcomes. 9)
Fostering international cooperation and coordinated multilateral actions. 10)
Redressing past harm and perceived injustices. 11)      Consideration of
intergenerational justice concerns, such as the impacts of policy decisions on
future generations. Source: IPCC, 2022. Sixth Assessment Report <a
href="https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg3/">Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of
Climate Change (ipcc.ch)</a> 1)        Worker Retraining and Skills Development
Amidst the challenges lie opportunities for economic diversification.
Transitioning away from extractive industries presents avenues for innovation
and sustainable growth, albeit accompanied by potential job displacement and
economic shocks (see Figure 17). Just transition planning, therefore, emerges as
paramount, ensuring that affected workers and communities are adequately
supported throughout this process. By fostering inclusive and equitable economic
diversification efforts, policymakers can adeptly navigate the energy transition
while advancing sustainable development and social equity. > < Figure 17:
Employment difference by sector between the baseline and 1.5°C Scenario,
thousand jobs. Source: <a href="https://www.undp.org/eurasia/blog/what-are-
socio-economic-impacts-energy-
transition">https://www.undp.org/eurasia/blog/what-are-socio-economic-impacts-
energy-transition</a> Understanding the implications of transitioning energy
technologies on employment requires both quantitative and qualitative analyses.
Quantitative analysis projects changes in employment levels with the shift in
energy technologies, considering direct, indirect, and induced jobs. Direct jobs
are associated with specific energy sector projects, such as construction and
operations. Indirect jobs include those related to supplying materials for
energy projects, while induced jobs are created when workers spend their income.
However, it is crucial to move beyond the sheer number of jobs to consider job
quality, including salary levels, job security, and skill requirements. New jobs
may not be located in the same regions or sectors, and the longevity of jobs
also varies, impacting the overall socioeconomic landscape. In the transition
towards a net-zero emissions future, there is a projected increase in energy
sector jobs, particularly in clean energy industries. According to the IEA's
Net-Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario, approximately 14 million new jobs are
anticipated in energy supply by 2030 (see Figure 18). Additionally, clean energy
industries like efficiency, automotive, and construction are expected to require
a further 16 million workers. However, job losses may occur in communities
heavily dependent on fossil fuel production, particularly coal. Job losses may
also occur in manufacturing sectors that are dependent on fossil fuels, such as
transport, in which the number of jobs per vehicle is higher in the case of
internal combustion engines than is the case for EVs. Effective long-term
planning is essential to minimize the impacts of job dislocations and facilitate
transitions into new sectors. Figure 18: Global employment in energy supply in
the Net Zero Scenario, 2019-2030 Many workers in traditional energy industries
possess transferable skills relevant to clean energy transitions. For example,
oil and gas workers may have skills applicable to offshore wind and carbon
capture projects. Similarly, coal miners may find opportunities in mining
critical minerals necessary for low-carbon technologies. Government assistance
and targeted programs can help match unemployed workers with new opportunities,
ensuring job quality and equitable distribution of benefits. Additionally,
attention to workplace safety, equity, and inclusion can address persistent
challenges and foster public acceptance of energy transitions. Worker retraining
and skills development programs are crucial in facilitating a smooth transition
away from extractive industries. By providing workers with the necessary
qualifications for sustainable roles in emerging sectors, these programs ensure
that individuals can adapt to changing job markets and contribute to the growth
of clean energy industries. Various training initiatives are designed to equip
workers with transferable skills relevant to emerging green sectors. These
initiatives focus on enhancing skills such as project management, technical
expertise, and renewable energy installation, enabling workers to transition
seamlessly into new roles within the clean energy economy. Labor unions,
industry associations, and educational institutions play a collaborative role in
supporting worker retraining and skills development. Through partnerships and
joint initiatives, these entities facilitate access to training programs,
advocate for worker rights, and promote industry-specific certifications. By
leveraging their collective resources and expertise, labor unions, industry
associations, and educational institutions contribute to the effective
implementation of transition strategies and the advancement of a just energy
transition agenda. Case Study 1: Bridging the Skills gap in North Macedonia Case
Study RBEC: Bridging the Skills gap in North Macedonia Focus Country: North
Macedonia <a href="https://www.undp.org/north-macedonia/projects/bridging-
skills-gap-create-new-and-better-jobs">https://www.undp.org/north-
macedonia/projects/bridging-skills-gap-create-new-and-better-jobs</a> --  It
should serve as a case study for Chapter 3 (Ensuring a Just Transition for
Workers and Affected Communities), Section 3.1 (Worker Retraining and Skills
Development). --     The section also discusses regional and gender disparities
in job creation. If possible, exemplify these through this case study or similar
ones. --    Address the challenges of moving from skills development to actual
job creation. 1)     Regional Disparities for Job Creation One significant
challenge in the energy transition lies in addressing regional disparities in
job creation. The type and distribution of existing jobs in the energy sector
are not uniform around the world, exacerbating disparities in employment
opportunities (see Figure 19). For instance, skilled labor shortages are already
plaguing the clean energy sector, with job vacancy rates rising in major
economies. This shortage is particularly acute in construction occupations,
which comprise nearly half of new energy-related jobs. These shortages limit the
availability of labor needed for installing clean energy technologies and
retrofitting buildings. Moreover, a proprietary survey conducted by IEA revealed
that installation and repair work positions were the most challenging to fill
due to a lack of industry-specific knowledge. Developing a sufficiently large
and skilled local workforce is imperative in every region, as most energy jobs
are tied to the location where installations are developed. However, despite the
growing demand for skilled labor in the clean energy sector, the number of
workers pursuing degrees or certifications relevant to energy sector jobs is not
keeping pace. Science, technology, engineering, and mathematical (STEM) degrees
pertinent to the energy sector are not rising fast enough to meet demand,
particularly in vocational jobs. Governments must address the direct and
indirect costs borne by workers pursuing retraining to close this skilled labor
gap. Figure 19: Energy employment by economic activity and by region, 2022
(thousand workers) Source: <a href="https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-
employment-2023/executive-summary">https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-
employment-2023/executive-summary</a> 2)    Gender Disparities in the Energy
Sector Cultivating a skilled labor force stands as a cornerstone in the
strategic blueprint of regions aiming to excel in the burgeoning renewable
energy sectors. However, despite strides made, gender imbalances persist within
the energy workforce, with women currently constituting a mere 20% of the
sector, with only 6% holding ministerial roles in energy across 72 surveyed
countries. Compounding this issue are gender wage disparities, particularly
pronounced within low-wage energy firms, accentuating the pressing need for
targeted interventions to rectify wage gaps and foster gender parity. Efforts
aimed at attracting and retaining more women in the energy sector are
indispensable for ensuring an equitable distribution of the dividends yielded by
the energy transition. Alarmingly, women are more prone than men to exit both
the energy sector and the labor market altogether, underscoring the imperative
of dismantling barriers hindering their participation and career progression, as
revealed by data from the IEA Gender and Energy Data Explorer (2023). The
impending shifts in labor dynamics driven by climate change carry profound
gender ramifications, bearing significant policy implications. Failure to
implement measures bolstering women’s engagement in emerging green vocations
risks perpetuating existing gender stereotypes, thereby constricting women's
access to the burgeoning job market. Hence, the adoption of "gender-
transformative" reskilling initiatives spanning various proficiency levels
emerges as a requisite to broaden women's pathways to novel employment
prospects. To honor the commitments outlined in the 2030 Agenda and uphold the
principle of leaving no one behind, fostering inclusivity emerges as a paramount
imperative. It is imperative to integrate women and girls from diverse
backgrounds into the transformative journey toward sustainable energy. While the
renewable energy sphere presents fertile ground for women's progression,
targeted policies and initiatives are indispensable to combat gender bias and
forge environments conducive to inclusivity. Exemplary initiatives such as
Barefoot College's Solar Mamas underscore the transformative power of empowering
women and nurturing their interest in STEM careers. Increasing examples of women
entrepreneurs in decentralized renewable energy (DRE) and productive uses of
renewable energy (PURE) sectors offer lessons for a gender-just energy
transition in rural regions. Scholarships, mentorship endeavors, capacity-
building initiatives, and access to financing and other other enabling
conditions stand as linchpins in upskilling women and dismantling gender
stereotypes prevalent within the energy sector. Moreover, the disproportionate
burden of unpaid care work borne by women raises formidable barriers to their
ingress into clean energy employment and entrepreneurship. Absent supportive
policies such as flexible work arrangements or childcare provisions, women risk
encountering additional hurdles in accessing clean energy avenues. Addressing
these challenges transcends mere gender equality; it is pivotal for optimizing
the effectiveness and longevity of clean energy initiatives, as women's insights
pave the way for more innovative and inclusive outcomes. 2)       Social Safety
Nets and Income Support Social safety nets and income support measures are
essential components in ensuring that workers impacted by the energy transition
receive adequate financial security. With the global shift towards sustainable
energy, it becomes increasingly crucial to safeguard the livelihoods of those
affected by these changes. This is where the concept of social safety nets
becomes paramount. Amidst the energy transition, social safety nets gain even
greater significance, particularly for workers whose jobs may be displaced or
affected by the shift in energy technologies. These measures help alleviate the
financial impact of transitions, providing a safety net for workers as they
navigate changes in their employment status. By ensuring access to essential
services such as energy, education, nutrition, and housing, social safety nets
contribute to a more equitable and inclusive transition process. Energy Safety
Nets (ESNs) for Increased Energy Access As part of a just energy system
transformation, ensuring increased energy access for all members of society is
paramount. ESNs play a crucial role in facilitating this access, particularly
for marginalized populations. ESNs encompass various strategies aimed at both
establishing energy connections and managing ongoing energy consumption. While
providing assistance for electricity connections or introducing clean cooking
technologies is a crucial first step, it is essential to ensure affordability
and accessibility for the most vulnerable individuals. ESNs serve as mechanisms
to prevent households and social groups from slipping into energy poverty. They
can take different forms, ranging from making physical access to electricity or
clean fuels affordable through connections, to ensuring that the unit price of
energy remains within reach for consumption. By offering targeted assistance to
those in need, ESNs play a critical role in facilitating access to affordable,
reliable, sustainable, and modern energy. In doing so, they contribute to
broader social and economic development goals, aligning with efforts to achieve
SDGs. To effectively implement ESNs, policymakers must consider a range of
factors. This includes defining the target demographic for an ESN and shaping
the criteria used to assess household eligibility. Different criteria may apply
depending on whether the focus is on supporting consumption or facilitating
energy connections. Policymakers must determine whether support necessitates one
or multiple targeting strategies and ESN mechanisms. Accurate household energy
consumption data are vital for determining appropriate subsidy levels and
benefits. Policymakers require robust evidence on energy consumption patterns to
develop tailored and effective ESN programs. Enhanced quantitative research,
improved data gathering techniques, and thorough analysis of household energy
consumption and expenditure are imperative for informing energy and social
protection policies. ESNs must align with the institutional, geographic, and
economic context of the country to be effective. Social assistance and ESN
initiatives should continually evolve to adapt to shifting social and economic
landscapes. Additionally, gender dynamics in energy management within households
should be considered, with ESNs designed to promote women's empowerment in
energy management. The success of ESNs relies on unwavering political
dedication. Changes in government have led to the discontinuation of programs
and disruptions in measures supporting energy connections and consumption in
some cases. Strong policy commitments at the highest levels are essential for
achieving universal access to affordable, reliable, sustainable, and modern
energy. These commitments serve as the foundation for devising and executing
measures to target impoverished households effectively. Poverty Alleviation and
Social Stability Social safety nets and income support programs contribute to
poverty reduction by ensuring a basic standard of living for vulnerable
populations during energy transitions. Research results support the assertion
that social safety nets and income support programs play a crucial role in
poverty alleviation during energy transitions. Studies have consistently shown
that targeted energy subsidies effectively mitigate the impact of rising energy
costs on vulnerable populations. For instance, a study by IEA found that well-
designed energy subsidies contribute to enhanced energy access for low-income
households while supporting the transition to cleaner energy sources. Similarly,
income support programs have demonstrated their effectiveness in stabilizing the
economic well-being of individuals during times of transition. Research by ILO
highlights the importance of income support in preventing the exacerbation of
inequalities and reducing the risk of social unrest during periods of economic
change. This research underscores the role of income support as a vital tool in
addressing poverty-related challenges associated with energy transitions.
Furthermore, social safety nets have been shown to address the immediate needs
of vulnerable populations, as evidenced by studies examining the impact of cash
transfers and targeted assistance programs. Research by the World Bank
emphasizes that effective social safety nets contribute to poverty reduction by
ensuring a basic standard of living for vulnerable populations facing economic
hardships during the energy transition. By preventing income disparities and
addressing unemployment, these programs contribute to social stability and
reduce the risk of social unrest. Social stability during energy transitions is
a crucial outcome facilitated by the strategic implementation of social safety
nets and income support programs. The Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) emphasizes the stabilizing role of social safety nets by
mitigating income inequality during economic transitions driven by the changing
energy landscape. These programs act as a safeguard not only for individual
financial well-being but also for maintaining a more equitable distribution of
resources within society, thereby promoting social stability. Furthermore,
studies exploring the connection between unemployment and social unrest
underline the impact of income support programs in mitigating the negative
social consequences of job displacement. Research conducted by the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) suggests that targeted income support reduces the social
implications of unemployment, including crime rates and political instability.
This research underscores the vital link between income support programs and
social stability, particularly during times of economic transition. Moreover,
investigations into the social outcomes of income disparities highlight the
potential for social instability when economic inequalities persist. It
demonstrates that income inequality is associated with various social issues,
including heightened crime rates, reduced social trust, and increased levels of
social unrest. In this context, income support programs emerge as essential
tools for preventing and alleviating the adverse social consequences linked to
income disparities. For instance, Uruguay’s National Social Emergency Response
Plan (PANES) targeted the poorest 20 percent of households and helped many at
the risk to increase their income and improve their employment opportunities.
Targeting Disadvantaged Individuals and Communities Targeted energy subsidies
ensure that the transition to cleaner energy sources does not disproportionately
burden low-income communities, fostering inclusivity in the energy transition
process. Inclusive energy transitions are essential for ensuring that the shift
to cleaner energy sources benefits all segments of society, including low-income
communities. Targeted energy subsidies represent a key mechanism in achieving
this inclusivity by preventing the disproportionate burden on economically
vulnerable groups during the transition process. The implementation of targeted
energy subsidies is grounded in the recognition that low-income communities or
individuals often face heightened challenges in adapting to cleaner but
potentially more expensive energy sources. As utility bills increase, these
vulnerable populations face increasing energy burdens, often having to make
difficult tradeoffs between paying for food, medicine, and energy. Appropriate
support mechanisms for such populations in the form of equitable tariff designs
and targeted incentives for energy efficiency upgrades and clean energy
technologies are essential for ensuring a just transition. It is necessary for
these energy subsidies to be targeted because if they are not, richer households
benefit disproportionately from them, given they consume more transport fuels
and electricity. Currently, most energy subsidies in the world are indeed
regressive in nature, meaning that often more than 50% of the total benefit is
received by the wealthiest segments of the population. Research does
consistently underscore the importance of targeted subsidies in fostering
inclusivity. Well-designed energy subsidies contribute to enhanced energy access
for low-income households while supporting the overall transition to cleaner
energy sources. One of the primary ways in which targeted energy subsidies
foster inclusivity is by ensuring that the costs associated with the adoption of
cleaner energy technologies do not disproportionately impact those with limited
financial resources. By providing financial relief or discounts on cleaner
energy alternatives, subsidies make it more feasible for low-income communities
to participate actively in the transition process. This not only addresses
immediate affordability concerns but also contributes to the broader goal of
reducing energy poverty. Moreover, targeted energy subsidies play a role in
leveling the playing field and preventing the widening of existing socio-
economic disparities. Without such measures, the transition to cleaner energy
sources might inadvertently exacerbate inequalities, as higher costs associated
with new technologies could further marginalize low-income communities. The
subsidies, therefore, act as a means of social justice, ensuring that the
benefits of the energy transition are distributed equitably. Case Study 2: RBA:
Modelling the employment Impacts of Energy Policies to Guide NDC Enhancement and
a Just Transition – Zimbabwe Case Study RBA: Modelling the employment Impacts of
Energy Policies to Guide NDC Enhancement and a Just Transition – Zimbabwe Focus
Country: Zimbabwe <a href="https://www.undp.org/zimbabwe/publications/measuring-
socioeconomic-impacts-climate-policies-guide-ndc-enhancement-and-just-
transition">https://www.undp.org/zimbabwe/publications/measuring-socioeconomic-
impacts-climate-policies-guide-ndc-enhancement-and-just-transition</a> <a href="
https://climatepromise.undp.org/sites/default/files/research_report_document/UND
P-Just-Transition-Report.pdf">https://climatepromise.undp.org/sites/default/file
s/research_report_document/UNDP-Just-Transition-Report.pdf</a> (page 18) --
It should serve as a case study for Chapter 3 (Ensuring a Just Transition for
Workers and Affected Communities), Section 3.2 (Social Safety Nets and Income
Support), immediately following the discussion on Poverty Alleviation, Social
Stability, and Inclusive Energy Transitions. --       Discuss the importance of
having adequate information and a diagnosis of the potential impacts of the
energy transition. Explain how modeling provides an interesting way to gain
prior understanding of such impacts. --       Address the limitations of
modeling in considerations. --       Discuss the replicable aspects of the
project. 3)       Community-Led Sustainable Energy Projects and Community-Based
Solutions Community-led sustainable energy projects serve as powerful tools for
empowering local communities worldwide, exemplifying the transformative
potential of grassroots initiatives in shaping a more just energy system. These
initiatives not only deploy renewable technologies and enhance energy efficiency
but also foster social cohesion, economic development, and environmental
stewardship. By prioritizing community engagement, these projects go beyond
simply generating clean energy; they are about building trust and collaboration
within communities while addressing historical societal inequalities in energy
systems. Real-world examples highlight the successes and lessons learned from
community-led initiatives. For instance, the RevoluSolar energy initiative in a
Brazilian favela brought renewable energy access to 30 families while
reinvesting profits into local charities and job training programs, thereby
improving overall citizen welfare and shielding residents from escalating energy
costs. Similarly, the community of Magliano Alpi in the Italian Alps developed
tools to forecast energy generation and demand, enabling effective utilization
of solar photovoltaic systems and reducing reliance on the grid during peak
demand periods. Policy support and regulatory reforms are essential for scaling
up community-led energy projects and ensuring their widespread adoption.
Initiatives such as the European Parliament's funding for advisory services and
technical assistance for community initiatives demonstrate steps in the right
direction. Additionally, sharing best practices globally can empower communities
to access local, clean, and affordable energy solutions, thereby enhancing
energy efficiency and community benefits through local generation and sharing,
which can alleviate pressure on power systems and mitigate carbon emissions.
Projects like the battery resource shared by households in northern Perth,
Australia, showcase the potential for collective savings and grid stress
reduction through community-based energy initiatives. Further mapping of
initiatives and benefits is underway as part of the IEA’s People-Centered Clean
Energy Transitions Programme and the Digital Demand-Driven Electricity Networks
Initiative (3DEN). Case Study 3: Caribbean SIDS: La Cooperativa Hidroeléctrica
de la Montaña (The Mountain Hydroelectric Cooperative) – Puerto Rico Case Study
Caribbean SIDS: La Cooperativa Hidroeléctrica de la Montaña (The Mountain
Hydroelectric Cooperative) Focus Country: Puerto Rico Useful links: <a
href="https://cooperativahidroelectrica.coop/cooperativa-hidroelectrica-
en.html">https://cooperativahidroelectrica.coop/cooperativa-hidroelectrica-
en.html</a> Main Discussion Points: --     It should serve as a case study for
Chapter 3 (Ensuring a Just Transition for Workers and Affected Communities),
Section 3.3 (Community-Led Sustainable Energy Projects and Community-Based
Solutions) --       Underscore the benefits of community-own energy projects to
build an energy democracy --        Focus on the lessons learn, reference
similar projects, and discuss replicable aspects of the project. 4)
Participatory Processes and Prior Informed Consent The global landscape features
numerous national commissions and task forces on just transition, indicating a
growing acknowledgment of the pivotal role of broad-based stakeholder
participation in forging consensus toward a sustainable future. Social dialogue,
involving negotiation, consultation, and information exchange among governments,
workers, and unions, serves as the cornerstone of this process. These inclusive
approaches are instrumental in implementing ambitious climate action, as
evidenced by initiatives linked to the Paris Agreement, where considerations
such as gender and youth involvement have been integrated into national climate
plans. In this context, Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) established by
the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP) is a
crucial concept for energy transition that ensures Indigenous Peoples have the
right to make decisions about projects and activities that may affect their
lands and territories. “Consent” is the collective decision made by right
holders, which is reached through customary decision-making processes. FPIC
involves three key elements: --  Free: Consent must be given voluntarily without
coercion, intimidation, or manipulation. The decision-making process should be
self-directed by the Indigenous community without external pressure. --  Prior:
Consent should be sought well in advance of any project or activity, allowing
sufficient time for Indigenous Peoples to engage in their decision-making
processes. --    Informed: Indigenous Peoples must be provided with accurate and
objective information about the proposed activity in a way that is accessible to
them. This ensures that consent is based on a clear understanding of the
potential impacts and benefits. Further leveraging existing processes and
stakeholder engagement platforms can engage diverse social change agents,
including women, Indigenous Peoples, workers, and employers, to share
responsibility for achieving net-zero commitments. In countries like South
Africa, entities such as the National Economic Development and Labour Council
(NEDLAC) have been established to facilitate dialogue between government,
worker, employer organizations, and civil society, illustrating the potential
for collaborative decision-making. Long-term decarbonization strategies require
widespread understanding and acceptance among various stakeholders, underlining
the significance of engaging with a diverse range of actors, including
governments, indigenous groups, businesses, experts, and households. However,
public opposition to renewable energy projects often stems from a real or
perceived lack of inclusion in planning and decision-making processes, leading
to a deficit of trust and transparency. Traditionally, energy policy evaluation
has centered on cost, environmental impact, and security of supply, sidelining
the societal dimension. To bridge this gap, there is a growing interest in
participatory and transdisciplinary approaches to energy system modeling and
planning. A conceptual framing aims to democratize decision-making processes in
energy projects by emphasizing meaningful integration of social acceptance into
analysis. This meaningful integration entails several key principles, including
prioritizing stakeholder input before quantitative analysis, ensuring an
iterative process allowing stakeholders to shape the analysis and evaluate
results, and adopting co-production and collaborative approaches involving both
academic and non-academic partners throughout the research process. Engagement
can manifest at various levels, from informing stakeholders through one-way
communication to actively collaborating with them in shaping research questions
and direction. By embracing participatory processes and ensuring prior informed
consent, energy transition initiatives can bolster transparency, foster trust,
and cultivate inclusive decision-making, ultimately enhancing the success and
sustainability of renewable energy projects. Box 5: What is Energy Democracy?
‘Energy Democracy’ is a concept rooted in democratic principles and practices,
focusing on the inclusive participation of citizens in decisions related to
energy production, distribution, and consumption. It encompasses a vision where
democratic procedures serve as mechanisms for discovering and implementing
demands for justice within the energy sector. This involves addressing questions
of ownership and control over energy resources, as well as ensuring equitable
access to energy services for all members of society. At its core, energy
democracy emphasizes the importance of reshaping social relations within the
energy system, prioritizing the empowerment of marginalized communities and
individuals to challenge the direction of energy innovations that affect them.
By promoting democratic participation, energy democracy seeks to foster
solidarity among participants, enabling them to recognize and act for the
collective good. Central to the concept of energy democracy is the idea of a
participatory energy system that operates in the public interest. This involves
creating mechanisms for citizens to have a meaningful say in energy decision-
making processes, ensuring that energy policies and practices reflect the
diverse needs and aspirations of society. Ultimately, energy democracy aims to
create a more equitable and sustainable energy system through cooperative and
consensual approaches to energy governance and strategy development. Case Study
3: RBLAC: Pacto Intercultural por La Yanama para el Desarrollo Humano y Buen
Vivir en La Guajira– Informed Prior Consent – Colombia Case Study RBLAC: Pacto
Intercultural por La Yanama para el Desarrollo Humano y Buen Vivir en La
Guajira– Informed Prior Consent Focus Country: Colombia Useful links: <a
href="https://pnudcolombia.exposure.co/conversacion-poderosa-yanama-
guajira">https://pnudcolombia.exposure.co/conversacion-poderosa-yanama-
guajira#</a>! <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eJLSipnD3d8">https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=eJLSipnD3d8</a> Main Discussion Points: --   It should serve
as a case study for Chapter 3 (Ensuring a Just Transition for Workers and
Affected Communities), Section 3.4 (Participatory Processes and Prior Informed
Consent). --   Explain the complexities of access to information within the
Wayúu context, as well as the necessary components of Prior Informed Consent. --
Discuss the replicable aspects of La Yanama, focusing on UNDP efforts to close
the knowledge gaps among different actors so that decisions are made with an
understanding of each other's concerns. 4)  A Just Energy Transition for the
Global South In the global battle against climate change, the concept of a just
energy transition extends across various sectors, including energy, agriculture,
and transportation. It emphasizes the need for a fair distribution of impacts
and costs to prevent widening inequality and marginalization. At its core lies
the imperative of inclusive participation, ensuring that diverse stakeholders,
particularly those in the most affected regions, play a role in shaping the
transition. For countries in the global South, the urgency of a just transition
is evident. These nations not only confront the challenge of combating climate
change but also must tackle entrenched socio-economic disparities, with poverty
alleviation taking precedence. Despite the recognized importance of a just
transition, many regions still struggle with a cursory understanding of this
concept, even as governments seek to incorporate it into their national climate
plans. Within this landscape, recurring obstacles highlight the critical need
for proactive just transition planning in developing countries. Challenges such
as informal labor markets, lack of union representation, and unclear land rights
intersect with issues of cultural significance tied to natural resources,
further complicating the transition process. Persistent poverty, high
unemployment rates, energy access disparities, and weak regulatory frameworks
compound the complexity of implementing just climate policies. Discussions
within the energy sector in these contexts often overlook a fundamental focus on
low-carbon pathways. However, the principles of a just transition remain
essential in assessing the distributional impacts of energy choices.
Vulnerability to climate change underscores the urgency for support and
awareness, particularly among marginalized communities. Additionally, adaptation
programs must align with just transition principles to avoid exacerbating
vulnerabilities inadvertently. Addressing skills and knowledge gaps emerges as a
pressing priority to empower stakeholder engagement and enable informed
decision-making. Capacity-building efforts must be widespread, especially in
regions where data on socio-economic impacts are limited. Furthermore, aligning
climate and development goals is crucial for garnering support and coherence for
a just transition. Despite the significant challenges, international climate
finance often prioritizes techno-economic transitions, neglecting considerations
of social, economic, and environmental justice outcomes. As momentum grows
around discussions of a just energy transition, bridging these gaps becomes
imperative to ensure an inclusive and equitable path toward a sustainable future
for all in the global South. 1) Challenges and Opportunities for developing
countries Developing countries in the global South confront a unique array of
challenges and opportunities as they navigate the path towards a just energy
transition (JET). While the transition presents significant hurdles, it also
offers promising avenues for sustainable development and equitable growth.
Understanding these contexts is paramount in devising effective strategies that
harness the potential of renewable energy while addressing socio-economic
disparities. At the heart of the challenge lies the need to balance
environmental stewardship with socio-economic development. Developing nations
often face limited access to clean energy resources, exacerbated by inadequate
infrastructure, financial constraints, and competing development priorities.
Moreover, these countries bear the brunt of climate change impacts, further
heightening the urgency for a transition to renewable energy sources. However,
amidst these challenges, there are considerable opportunities for developing
countries to capitalize on the JET. The transition presents a chance to leapfrog
traditional energy systems and embrace innovative, sustainable solutions. By
investing in renewable energy infrastructure, developing nations can enhance
energy access, improve resilience to climate change, and foster economic growth.
Additionally, the JET offers avenues for job creation, technological innovation,
and inclusive development, particularly in rural and marginalized communities.
In this chapter, we will delve into the specific challenges and opportunities
that developing countries face in the context of the just energy transition. By
examining these dynamics, we aim to shed light on strategies and initiatives
that can facilitate a transition towards a more sustainable and equitable energy
future for all. 1)       Advancing the Value Chain In the global pursuit of
decarbonization, advancing the value chain in critical mineral and battery
development holds immense potential for developing countries to not only enhance
resilience but also narrow the decarbonization gap. A critical question emerges:
can the energy transition enable developing nations to not only boost their
exports of primary ores but also ascend the value chain to attract higher-margin
activities such as mineral processing? Processed materials like steel and
alumina not only command significant price premiums over unrefined ores but also
serve to reduce input costs for infrastructural and industrial projects, thereby
catalyzing local economic development. In addition, price volatility of raw
materials is higher than that of processed materials, so value addition at home
also helps to mitigate against price shocks. Regional cooperation emerges as a
pivotal strategy to enable countries to capture a larger share of the value
associated with mineral production. Rather than engaging in individual
negotiations with foreign companies, coordinated regional approaches could prove
more effective in ensuring favorable conditions for mineral-rich nations.
Moreover, coordination across regions becomes imperative as pooling respective
mineral supplies can benefit most countries aiming to establish downstream
industries. From lithium extraction to the electric vehicle The journey of
lithium from extraction to its integration into electric vehicles (EVs) is a
complex process, crucial for understanding the battery value chain. At its core,
a battery consists of two poles: the positive cathode and the negative anode,
separated by conductive electrolytes. These electrolytes facilitate the movement
of ions as the battery charges and discharges. The composition of the cathode
varies, incorporating different ratios of lithium and other minerals depending
on factors such as battery capacity, voltage, and the specific technology
employed. For instance, Lithium Nickel Manganese Cobalt (NMC) batteries utilize
cobalt, nickel, and manganese, while Lithium Iron Phosphate (LFP) batteries rely
on iron and phosphates. After the mineral mixture is prepared, a series of
chemical processes are applied to produce mixed metal hydroxides, which are then
calcined with lithium carbonate or lithium hydroxide to yield lithium oxide, the
active component of the cathode. The production journey of lithium from
extraction to its utilization in EVs spans multiple stages, each with its own
unique requirements, technologies, and market structures. The initial phase of
the value chain involves sourcing various raw materials. Latin America and the
Caribbean collectively hold a significant portion, about 60%, of the world's
identified lithium resources, primarily concentrated within the "lithium
triangle" encompassing Argentina, Bolivia, and Chile. Despite this abundance,
the translation of resources into production is not straightforward: LAC
countries account for only 32% of lithium production, despite possessing 52% of
the global reserves. In 2022, the global market for cathode materials reached a
valuation of $21 billion, with projections indicating a doubling of growth
within the next decade. Currently, cathode production is largely concentrated in
China and Asia, contributing approximately 93% of the global volume in 2019. The
processes of cell manufacturing and battery assembly are closely intertwined. A
global trend towards vertical integration is evident in industrial operations,
particularly in regions near electric vehicle (EV) consumption centers where
demand is anticipated to surge. Consequently, precursor materials are either
synthesized directly in battery chemical plants or prefabricated cells are
converted into batteries. Notably, battery pack manufacturing facilities are
often situated close to EV production sites to mitigate safety risks and
transportation costs. Vertical integration, driven by economies of scale,
primarily aims to enhance cost efficiency in EV production. However, the
decision to integrate mineral extraction into the value chain is primarily
motivated by the imperative to ensure a stable mineral supply. The extraction
and production of lithium carbonate suitable for batteries require substantial
investments. There are strong expectations for the expansion of lithium
production operations in the short term, driven by the demand for technologies
essential for global energy transition. However, these investments and the
effective management of the socio-environmental impacts of the lithium industry
necessitate adequate coordination between public and private entities: modern,
transparent, efficient, and reliable institutions, along with impeccable
corporate socio-environmental practices. To seize the economic development
opportunities that can arise from lithium mining and its derived industry,
developing countries must continue consolidating public-private and
international partnerships to attract investments for developing the upstream
value chain while also positioning themselves in new segments of the value
chain. Strengthening management and monitoring mechanisms within the industry is
crucial in this regard. Long-term strategic plans and programs are invaluable in
identifying and prioritizing actions, thereby creating favorable conditions for
investment and generating shared added value around primary production. While
there is no universal blueprint for these plans, cross-jurisdictional knowledge
exchange is crucial for expediting progress. Additionally, as countries work
towards building local industrial capabilities for battery production, there are
opportunities to capitalize on intermediate product manufacturing and enhance
the integration of specialized local suppliers to further enhance value-added
around lithium production. In the context of the lithium value chain, value
addition and beneficiation refer to the processes of transforming raw lithium
materials into higher-value products, such as lithium compounds and lithium-ion
batteries. This transformation involves various stages of processing, refining,
and manufacturing, which can significantly increase the value of the lithium
material. The potential for developing downstream value addition in developing
countries lies in their natural resource endowments, particularly in the Lithium
Triangle of South America, which includes Chile, Argentina, and Bolivia. These
countries have significant lithium reserves, making them crucial players in the
global lithium supply chain. By developing their own downstream processing and
manufacturing capabilities, they can increase their share of the value chain and
generate more revenue from their natural resources. For downstream value
addition in the lithium industry, several critical factors come into play. Labor
plays a crucial role in ensuring the success of downstream processing
facilities, as skilled workers are needed to operate and manage the complex
processes involved in lithium refining and manufacturing. Technological know-
how, including effective technology transfer policies, is essential for
developing countries to acquire the necessary expertise and capabilities to
establish downstream processing facilities. Strong industrial policies and
government investments are vital in providing the necessary support and
incentives for the development of downstream value-addition capabilities.
Additionally, trade and investment policies that shield infant industries from
global competition can create a conducive environment for the growth of
downstream lithium processing sectors in developing countries, allowing them to
capture more value in the global lithium supply chain. Seizing the opportunities
presented by the global energy transition necessitates a holistic approach,
emphasizing the strengthening of production processes, industries, value chains,
and consumption dynamics. This demands coordinated action by both the public and
private sectors, supported by effective governance structures and urgent
collaboration among stakeholders to capitalize on brief opportunity windows,
particularly in the strategic development of lithium resources within global
supply chains. Case Study 2: RBAS: Renewable Energy Manufacturing Initiative –
Morocco Case Study RBAS: Renewable Energy Manufacturing Initiative – Morocco
Focus Country: Morocco <a href="https://www.seforall.org/programmes/un-
energy/South-South-Cooperation">https://www.seforall.org/programmes/un-
energy/South-South-Cooperation</a> <a
href="https://www.seforall.org/programmes/un-energy/South-South-
Cooperation/aremi">https://www.seforall.org/programmes/un-energy/South-South-
Cooperation/aremi</a> Main Discussion Points: --       It should serve as a case
study for Chapter 4 (A Just Energy Transition for the Global South), Section 4.1
(Challenges and Opportunities for Developing Countries), Sub-section 4.1.1
(Advancing the Value Chain). --   Address the challenges of actually advancing
the value chain in this context and the subsequent benefits. --    The program
is also applied in other countries; briefly present them, but then move to the
Moroccan context. 2) Land-related Conflicts and Water Use Considerations The
Indian Rewa Mega Solar project and lithium mining in Argentina exemplify the
challenges associated with renewable energy land use. These practices have
sparked tensions and conflicts over land use, exacerbated by overlooked seasonal
land-use patterns and unfulfilled promises of employment opportunities.
Additionally, the relationship between land use for renewables and water
resources has raised concerns about increased stresses on available water
sources and reduced access routes in both Indian and Argentinian contexts. Land
rights in many developing countries, particularly in the Global South, are often
not clearly defined, regulated, or recognized, leading to various challenges and
inequities. For instance, in Colombia, approximately 52% of land tenure in rural
areas was informal in 2019, contributing to inequitable land ownership
distribution. Despite legal provisions granting women rights to land, social
norms, and limited access to resources like finance often hinder their ability
to exercise these rights effectively. Similarly, in Ghana, male farm ownership
exceeds that of women by more than three times, especially for medium and large
farms. Indonesia faces challenges regarding land ownership, particularly in
forest and land management, due to a complex mix of traditional, customary,
formal, and informal arrangements, leading to legal ambiguity and tenure
insecurity, which in turn perpetuates land-related conflicts and affects
community livelihoods. Indigenous communities, whose territories often overlap
with areas designated for timber or palm oil concessions, face particular
challenges due to the lack of recognition of their customary laws, leading to
conflicts over land use. The insecurity of land tenure exacerbates existing
socio-economic problems and inequalities during energy transitions. Unclear or
lacking tenure can exclude individuals from support strategies, such as
assistance for adaptation or low-carbon land management, and hinder access to
interventions aimed at mitigating greenhouse gas emissions or enhancing
resilience in the forestry sector. Moreover, unclear land tenure may affect
eligibility for emergency programs and financial transfers intended to assist
vulnerable groups during the transition. Therefore, the planning of climate-
related interventions impacting land must carefully consider potential impacts
on individuals, particularly women, who lack secure tenure. Access to natural
resources, such as forests, is a fundamental aspect of community identity and
spirituality but is becoming more restricted due to large-scale economic
activities. Forests serve not only as a source of livelihood but also as a core
component of community identity and spirituality. Thus, when climate transitions
relate to forest resource management and restrict access to forests, transition
planners must engage with communities beyond offering alternative livelihood
strategies. Psychological impacts and mental health problems are common in major
socio-economic transitions, as documented in mining communities when mines close
and communities are left with few livelihood options. Unfortunately, these
issues are not always addressed effectively in the development of climate
policy. Engaging with these communities in dialogue is essential for
establishing and achieving the country's NDC goals effectively. This underscores
the importance of addressing land-related conflicts and ensuring equitable
access to resources and support programs during the energy transition process in
developing countries. 3)    Persistent Poverty and Energy Access Gaps Persistent
poverty in the Global South is intricately intertwined with the lack of access
to reliable energy, perpetuating a cycle of deprivation that marginalizes entire
communities. This issue is exacerbated by limited infrastructure, insufficient
investment, and socio-economic barriers, all of which hinder the integration of
impoverished areas into sustainable energy systems. As a result, energy poverty
persists, impeding socio-economic development and exacerbating inequalities.
Despite these formidable challenges, addressing climate change offers a unique
opportunity to mitigate poverty and narrow energy access gaps through a
transformative shift towards a just energy system. While the transition to
renewable energy sources may entail job displacements in sectors reliant on
fossil fuels, it also presents the prospect of creating new green jobs that
prioritize social inclusion and economic empowerment, particularly for
vulnerable demographics like women and youth engaged in informal labor. Africa's
wealth of energy and mineral resources serves as a cornerstone for sustainable
development and poverty alleviation on the continent. By embracing renewable
energy sources and adopting sustainable mining practices, African nations can
forge climate-resilient economies while fostering social inclusion and
generating employment opportunities. Additionally, integrating social
considerations into climate action strategies can help mitigate the adverse
effects of transition policies on marginalized communities, ensuring that the
benefits of climate action are equitably distributed among all citizens. Drawing
lessons from successful endeavors and placing a strong emphasis on social
inclusion in climate action plans, African countries can effectively navigate
the inherent trade-offs between economic progress and social welfare. With the
implementation of appropriate policies and measures, Africa has the potential to
leverage its abundant energy resources to construct a sustainable and equitable
future for its populace, thereby breaking the cycle of poverty and energy
disparity in the Global South. Case Study 3: RBAP: Sustainable Biomass Energy -
How can women upscaled their fish drying business? – Sri Lanka Case Study RBAP:
Sustainable Biomass Energy - How can women upscaled their fish drying business?
Focus Country: Sri Lanka <a href="https://www.undp.org/srilanka/stories/energy-
poverty">https://www.undp.org/srilanka/stories/energy-poverty</a> <a
href="https://www.undp.org/srilanka/projects/biomass-
phase-2">https://www.undp.org/srilanka/projects/biomass-phase-2</a> --  It
should serve as a case study for Chapter 4 (A Just Energy Transition for the
Global South), Section 4.1 (Challenges and Opportunities for Developing
Countries), Sub-section 4.1.3 (Persistent Poverty and Energy Access Gaps). --
Discuss how energy poverty can effectively be addressed through sustainable
energy solutions. --        Don’t forget to discuss the gender-responsive aspect
of this project. --        Discuss the replicable aspects of the project. 2)
Governance Strategies for a Just Energy Transition Energy governance stands as a
linchpin in steering a just transition, aiming to mitigate the adverse impacts
of climate policies while maximizing positive social outcomes for a diverse
array of stakeholders, including local communities, women, youth, workers, and
others. This endeavor entails alleviating social pressures on affected
communities and harnessing the energy transition as a driver for empowerment,
development, and equal opportunities, ensuring that no one is left behind.
Central to this effort are government policies, regulations, and incentives,
which play a pivotal role in addressing distributional impacts and mitigating
risks associated with the energy transition, thus fostering economic, social,
and political development. A just energy transition necessitates a
comprehensive, integrated approach that permeates all energy planning processes
and effectively navigates through the complex and intersecting challenges
inherent in the transition. This holistic approach finds expression in system-
wide mobilizations, spanning multilateral environmental settings, social
protection policies, social dialogue, human rights, and fiscal policies. >Sitio
web, Escala de tiempo Descripción generada automáticamente< Figure 20: Principle
for Effective Governance for Sustainable Development. Source: UN ECOSOC (2018)
To facilitate a just energy transition, governments must coordinate and actively
participate in collective action and transparently engage with local
stakeholders, fostering robust collaboration between institutions. This
collaborative endeavor can engender an international environment conducive to
peer pressure and leadership in energy transition. Multilateral environmental
governance, for instance, fosters accountability among actors by encouraging
countries to increase their designated Nationally Determined Contributions
(NDCs), as outlined in the Paris Agreement. Prior to 2023, the principles of
just energy transition were already embedded in 38% of NDCs and 56% of long-term
strategies (LTS), underscoring a growing recognition of the importance of equity
and inclusivity in climate action. Effective governance strategies must uphold
these principles, ensuring that the transition to clean energy benefits all
members of society, with a commitment to leaving no one behind. Addressing the
distributional consequences of climate action presents a significant challenge,
characterized by uncertainty in net benefits and the distribution of costs and
benefits among different stakeholders. Developing countries face a particularly
daunting task as they grapple with the need for hard data to anticipate changes
and demonstrate the overwhelming benefits of transitioning to a green economy.
This transition holds promise not only for environmental sustainability but also
for achieving a just transition for society as a whole. To bridge this data gap
and facilitate evidence-based just transition planning, the UNDP's Climate
Promise initiative has been instrumental in guiding countries. Through
qualitative and quantitative assessments, including modeling techniques,
countries can estimate the impacts of NDCs on key socioeconomic indicators such
as GDP, employment, skills, income distribution, and gender equality. These
assessments enable countries to gain insights into the distributional impacts of
NDCs and identify targeted measures to ensure a just transition, particularly
for vulnerable populations such as women and informal workers. For instance, in
Nigeria and Zimbabwe, national green jobs assessments conducted using the Green
Jobs Assessment Model (GJAM) have informed the development of NDCs and just
transition roadmaps. Similarly, in Turkey, the GJAM was utilized to analyze the
potential effects of reducing coal's share in electricity production and
increasing investments in wind and solar energy. Building upon this foundational
work, efforts are underway to expand the scope of assessments to encompass
broader socioeconomic implications associated with implementing NDCs and LTS. In
Serbia, for example, a qualitative baseline analysis was undertaken as part of a
just transition study focusing on coal-intensive regions and communities. This
study, informed by international best practices, provides an overview of key
considerations and offers a comprehensive seven-step roadmap along with follow-
up actions to ensure a just transition. By leveraging such assessments and
strategies, countries can navigate the complexities of transitioning to a green
economy while leaving no one behind, thereby fostering sustainable development
and social equity. Governments bear the primary responsibility for establishing
the requisite policy frameworks to expedite a just transition and facilitate
social dialogue. Such policy support encompasses the formulation of social
protection policies necessary to accommodate labor market adjustments, enhance
job quality and incomes, and promote equity and social inclusion. This entails
the provision of welfare safety nets and adequate compensation for individuals,
communities, and regions adversely affected by planned policies. Investment in
human and institutional capital training assumes paramount importance as policy
complexity escalates. Equipping stakeholders with the necessary skills and
knowledge to navigate evolving policy landscapes effectively and fostering
south-south cooperation are key to facilitating the sharing of best practices
and experiences across countries and regions, thereby bolstering institutional
capacities and policy integration for a just transition. For instance, in
Belize, UNDP is actively engaged in bolstering the capacities of Small- and
Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) to access green technology, digitalization, and
innovation. Empowering SMEs with the tools and resources needed to embrace
sustainable practices contributes to fostering a conducive environment for green
entrepreneurship and economic diversification. Through targeted support and
collaboration, governments, alongside organizations like UNDP, can spearhead
efforts to foster inclusive and sustainable development in alignment with the
principles of a just transition. The patchwork of international and
transnational initiatives underscores the need for greater coherence to foster
responsible, sustainable, and transparent supply chains. While there has been a
growing recognition of the challenges associated with the critical materials
supply chain, the proliferation of voluntary initiatives and regulatory
frameworks by governments, businesses, and civil society groups has resulted in
a fragmented landscape of standards. This fragmentation risks sowing confusion
among stakeholders and underscores the imperative for enhanced visibility and
coherence. A renewables-based energy transition offers the opportunity to
redefine the legacy of extractive industries. Stronger international cooperation
is necessary to raise and enforce standards, while longer-term corporate views
are essential for sustainable development and earning social license. By
addressing these challenges and embracing sustainable practices, the renewable
energy transition can pave the way for a more equitable and environmentally
conscious future. 3)        Just Energy Transition Partnerships (JETP) Financing
Mechanisms Ensuring a just transition demands substantial investments in both
people and places, necessitating a combination of public and private capital.
While there are still significant gaps in systematically aligning financial
flows with just transition goals, existing frameworks and instruments within
NDCs and climate financing provide a foundation for embedding just transition
principles. Public investment plays a pivotal role in benchmarking the
experience of building stronger public finance systems through NDC and Long-Term
Strategy (LTS) enhancement processes. These frameworks already articulate costs,
identify finance gaps, monitor and track finance flows, and highlight investment
opportunities for the private sector. Leveraging these frameworks can enhance
understanding of the gaps in just transition finance and facilitate targeted
resource mobilization. Private sector investment is crucial for driving
environmental and social outcomes, extending beyond operational carbon
footprints to encompass broader business practices and facilitation of
activities through capital provision and financial services. Efforts to engage
the private sector for NDC implementation and investments can be leveraged to
further involve them in supporting a just transition. Just Energy Transition
Partnerships (JETPs) represent innovative financing mechanisms aimed at
supporting developing countries in transitioning from fossil fuels to clean
energy sources. These partnerships provide financial assistance for phasing out
coal-based power plants, enhancing electrical grids, and retraining workers,
particularly vital for countries in the Global South requiring significant
financial support for a sustainable energy transition. The inaugural JETP took
shape at COP 26 in Glasgow, where South Africa garnered pledges of USD 8.5
billion in funding from key stakeholders including France, Germany, the United
Kingdom, the United States, and the European Union. This landmark initiative
swiftly gained momentum as countries like India, Indonesia, Vietnam, and Senegal
rallied to join forces in advancing the goals of the JETP. As momentum grew, the
donor landscape expanded to include vital partners such as multilateral
development banks, national development banks, and development finance agencies.
The focused and collaborative nature of JETPs, characterized by a leaner group
of participants, positions them as potent catalysts for driving progress in the
energy transition—an advantage notably absent in the sprawling negotiations of
the UN climate talks, where the influence of major oil and gas-producing nations
often hampers consensus. In a significant development at COP 27 in Sharm el-
Sheikh in November 2022, South Africa unveiled its comprehensive JETP
Implementation Plan (JETP IP), delineating strategic investment priorities
across sectors including electricity, new energy vehicles, and green hydrogen.
The financing requirements outlined in the JETP IP, totaling USD 98 billion, far
exceed the initial commitment made in Glasgow, signaling a sobering assessment
of the transition's scope and the substantial changes required to achieve a
truly just energy transition. Meanwhile, at the G20 leaders' summit in Bali,
held in November 2022, Indonesia made waves with its JETP agreement, securing a
hefty USD 20 billion in financing over a 3 to 5-year period, with contributions
evenly distributed between donors and the private sector. This groundbreaking
pact unveiled a clear emissions reduction trajectory, targeting a peak in power
sector emissions by 2030—seven years ahead of schedule—alongside ambitious
carbon dioxide emissions reductions, poised to be a quarter lower than
previously envisaged within the same timeframe. The emergence of JETPs, while
formally introduced within the framework of the UNFCCC, diverges from the
traditional multilateral negotiation process. This departure has sparked
numerous inquiries surrounding governance structures, financial mechanisms, and
overall equity within these partnerships. Questions linger regarding the
potential impact of JETPs on the global pursuit of a just transition, their
implications for existing multilateral financial mechanisms like the Green
Climate Fund, and their influence on critical deliberations concerning climate
finance obligations versus eligibility. Critical voices underscore the
imperative for a just (energy) transition to prioritize grassroots involvement
and extend its reach to both national and local levels. Stakeholders emphasize
the need for seamless integration of JETPs into national strategies and
development blueprints, advocating for a harmonious alignment rather than
reshaping national agendas to accommodate JETP objectives. Notably concerning is
the opacity surrounding JETP governance, with limited public access to crucial
information such as the engagement of the International Partners Group (IPG)
with recipient nations, resource disbursement, and formal agreements. Amidst
these concerns looms the specter of perpetuating—or exacerbating—the inherent
inequalities characteristic of traditional bilateral aid relationships, with
JETPs potentially perpetuating a similar model without acknowledging or
rectifying underlying disparities. This underscores the pressing need for
transparency, accountability, and inclusivity within JETP governance frameworks
to ensure that the transition to clean energy is truly equitable and beneficial
for all stakeholders involved. Inclusivity and equity are crucial considerations
in balancing cost efficiency with a just transition to ensure inclusivity and
benefit for all segments of society. Addressing obstacles related to political
economy, policy alignment, investment, and finance strategy is essential for
successful JETP implementation. Furthermore, it is imperative to ensure that
JETPs do not exacerbate existing economic inequalities or lead to "debt traps",
as some critics argue regarding current funding mechanisms. 5)      Annex >A
graph of a number of different numbers Description automatically generated with
medium confidence< Figure 21: Market size for key energy transition minerals
Table 1: Summary of life cycle inventories’ scopes, per type of technology
Technology Included Excluded Coal power without CCS Energy carrier supply chain,
from extraction to combustion, including methane leakage. Infrastructure
construction, operation, and dismantling (energy inputs and waste production)
Connection to grid Potential recycling of dismantled equipment. with CCS Same as
above, plus capture equipment and chemicals, transportation of captures CO2 and
storage infrastructure (well) Same as above, plus Potential emissions (leakage)
from captured CO2 transportation or from the storage site. Natural gas power
without CCS Energy carrier supply chain, from extraction to combustion including
methane leakage. Infrastructure construction, operation, and dismantling (energy
inputs and waste production). Connection to grid. Potential recycling of
dismantled equipment. with CCS Same as above, plus capture equipment and
chemicals, transportation of captured CO2 and storge infrastructure (well) Same
as above, plus Potential emissions (leakage) from captured CO2 transportation or
from the storage site. Hydropower Construction, site preparation, transportation
of materials Connection to grid Potential recycling of dismantled equipment
Site-specific biogenic emissions of CO2 and CH4 Nuclear power Fuel element
supply chain (from extraction to fuel fabrication) Core processes (construction
and decommissioning of power plant, as well as operation) Back-end processes:
spent fuel management, storage, and final repository Connection to grid
Potential recycling of dismantled equipment Reprocessing of spent fuel
(conservative assumption that all fuel is primary) Concentrated solar power
Infrastructure, site preparation and occupation, operation, and maintenance
(including 6-hour storage) Decommissioning (energy inputs and waste production)
Connection to grid Potential recycling of dismantled equipment Photovoltaics
Infrastructure, site preparation and occupation, operation, and maintenance
Decommissioning (energy inputs and waste production) Connection to grid
Potential recycling of dismantled equipment Wind power Infrastructure, site
preparation and occupation, operation, and maintenance Decommissioning (energy
inputs and waste production) Connection to grid Potential recycling of
dismantled equipment >A graph of different colored squares Description
automatically generated< Figure 22: Additional workers in clean energy and
related sectors in the Net Zero Scenario, by sector and job type, 2020-2030 >A
graph with different colored squares Description automatically generated< Figure
23: Additional workers in the Net Zero Scenario by occupation and skill level,
2020-2030 >Icon Description automatically generated< footnote1) footnote2) <a
href="https://edition.cnn.com/2017/09/15/americas/irma-barbuda-population-
trnd/index.html">https://edition.cnn.com/2017/09/15/americas/irma-barbuda-
population-trnd/index.html</a> footnote3) <a
href="https://www.iea.org/reports/security-of-clean-energy-
transitions-2">https://www.iea.org/reports/security-of-clean-energy-
transitions-2</a> footnote4) <a href="https://ourworldindata.org/energy-
overview">https://ourworldindata.org/energy-overview</a> footnote5)
https://trackingsdg7.esmap.org/data/files/download-
documents/sdg7-report2023-full_report.pdf footnote6) <a
href="https://www.ohchr.org/en/stories/2021/07/social-protection-must-be-
strengthened-next-crisis#:~:text=55%20percent%20of%20the%20world's,2021%2C%20in%
20Geneva%2C%20Switzerland">https://www.ohchr.org/en/stories/2021/07/social-
protection-must-be-strengthened-next-crisis#:~:text=55%20percent%20of%20the%20wo
rld's,2021%2C%20in%20Geneva%2C%20Switzerland</a>. footnote7) <a
href="https://ourworldindata.org/energy-mix">https://ourworldindata.org/energy-
mix</a> footnote8) <a href="https://www.un.org/en/conferences/environment">https
://www.un.org/en/conferences/environment</a> footnote9) <a href="https://mc-
cd8320d4-36a1-40ac-83cc-3389-cdn-endpoint.azureedge.net/-
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2024/Mar/IRENA_RE_Capacity_Statistics_2024
.pdf?rev=50a4c39fd14c4274b246cd51150a0aa1">https://mc-
cd8320d4-36a1-40ac-83cc-3389-cdn-endpoint.azureedge.net/-
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2024/Mar/IRENA_RE_Capacity_Statistics_2024
.pdf?rev=50a4c39fd14c4274b246cd51150a0aa1</a> footnote10) <a
href="https://ourworldindata.org/energy-mix">https://ourworldindata.org/energy-
mix</a> footnote11) <a href="https://climatepromise.undp.org/news-and-
stories/what-just-transition-and-why-it-
important">https://climatepromise.undp.org/news-and-stories/what-just-
transition-and-why-it-important</a> footnote12) <a
href="https://www.ilo.org/global/topics/green-jobs/WCMS_824102/lang--
en/index.htm">https://www.ilo.org/global/topics/green-jobs/WCMS_824102/lang--
en/index.htm</a> footnote13) For a review, see Wang, X., & Lo, K. (2021). Just
transition: A conceptual review. Energy Research & Social Science, 82, 102291.<a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2021.102291">
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2021.102291</a> footnote14) Williams, S., &
Doyon, A. (2019). Justice in energy transitions. Environmental Innovation and
Societal Transitions, 31, 144–153.<a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2018.12.001">
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2018.12.001</a> footnote15) Jenkins, K.,
McCauley, D., Heffron, R., Stephan, H., & Rehner, R. (2016). Energy justice: A
conceptual review. Energy Research & Social Science, 11, 174–182.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2015.10.004 footnote16) Sovacool, B. K., Burke,
M., Baker, L., Kotikalapudi, C. K., & Wlokas, H. (2017). New frontiers and
conceptual frameworks for energy justice. Energy Policy, 105, 677–691.<a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2017.03.005">
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2017.03.005</a> footnote17) Human Development
Report 2021-2022, UNDP, September 2022. <a
href="https://hdr.undp.org/content/human-development-
report-2021-22">https://hdr.undp.org/content/human-development-
report-2021-22</a> footnote18) IEA (2022), World Energy Outlook 2022, IEA, Paris
<a href="https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-
outlook-2022">https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2022</a>
footnote19) <a
href="https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2021/11/12/climate/cop26-emissions-com
pensation.html">https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2021/11/12/climate/cop26-
emissions-compensation.html</a> footnote20) Primary energy is the energy
available as resources – such as the fuels burnt in power plants – before it has
been transformed. This relates to the coal before it has been burned, the
uranium, or the barrels of oil. Primary energy includes energy that the end user
needs, in the form of electricity, transport and heating, plus inefficiencies
and energy that is lost when raw resources are transformed into a usable form.
footnote21) <a href="https://www.irena.org/Digital-Report/World-Energy-
Transitions-Outlook-2023">https://www.irena.org/Digital-Report/World-Energy-
Transitions-Outlook-2023</a> footnote22) Lewis, J., Hernández, D., & Geronimus,
A. T. (2020). Energy efficiency as energy justice: Addressing racial inequities
through investments in people and places. Energy Efficiency, 13(3), 419–432. <a 
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s12053-019-09820-
z">https://doi.org/10.1007/s12053-019-09820-z</a>; Sovacool, B. K., Carley, S.,
& Kiesling, L. (2024). Energy justice beyond the wire: Exploring the
multidimensional inequities of the electrical power grid in the United States.
Energy Research & Social Science, 111, 103474.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2024.103474; footnote23) Hernández, D. (2015).
Sacrifice Along the Energy Continuum: A Call for Energy Justice. Environmental
Justice, 8(4), 151–156. https://doi.org/10.1089/env.2015.0015 footnote24) <a
href="https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2022-08/UNDP-RBAP-
Foresight-Playbook-2022.pdf">UNDP-RBAP-Foresight-Playbook-2022.pdf</a>
footnote25) Proskuryakova, L. Energy technology foresight in emerging economies.
Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 119, 205-210 (2017)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2016.05.024 footnote26) Chiu et al. Effects
of low-frequency noise from wind turbines on heart rate variability in healthy
individuals. Scientific Reports, 11, 17817, 1-12 (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-97107-8 footnote27) Scheidel et al. Global
impacts of extractive and industrial development projects on Indigenous People’s
lifeways, lands and rights, Sciences Advances, 9, 23, 1-9 (2023). <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.ade9557">DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.ade9557</a>
footnote28) Garnett, S. T. et al. A spatial overview of the global importance of
Indigenous lands for conservation. Nat. Sustain. 1, 369–374 (2018). <a href="htt
ps://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-018-0100-6">https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-018-0100-
6</a> footnote29) Owen, J.R., Kemp, D., Lechner, A.M. et al. Energy transition
minerals and their intersection with land-connected peoples. Nat Sustain 6,
203–211 (2023). <a href="https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-022-00994-
6">https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-022-00994-6</a> footnote30) Owen, J.R., Kemp,
D., Lechner, A.M. et al. Energy transition minerals and their intersection with
land-connected peoples. Nat Sustain 6, 203–211 (2023). <a href="https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41893-022-00994-6">https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-022-00994-6</a>
footnote31) IRENA. Geopolitics of the Energy Transition: Critical Minerals
(2023). footnote32) IRENA (2023), World Energy Transitions Outlook 2023: 1.5°C
Pathway, International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi.
https://www.irena.org/Publications/2023/Jun/World-Energy-Transitions-
Outlook-2023 footnote33) : IRENA (2023), Geopolitics of the energy transition:
Critical materials, International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi. <a
href="https://www.irena.org/Publications/2023/Jul/Geopolitics-of-the-Energy-
Transition-Critical-Materials?trk=public_post_comment-
text">https://www.irena.org/Publications/2023/Jul/Geopolitics-of-the-Energy-
Transition-Critical-Materials?trk=public_post_comment-text</a> footnote34) IEA
(2023), Critical Minerals Market Review 2023, IEA, Paris <a
href="https://www.iea.org/reports/critical-minerals-market-
review-2023">https://www.iea.org/reports/critical-minerals-market-
review-2023</a> footnote35) Mensah, A. K., Mahiri, I. O., Owusu, O., Mireku, O.
D., Wireko, I., & Kissi, E. A. (2015). Environmental impacts of mining: a study
of mining communities in Ghana. Applied Ecology and Environmental Sciences,
3(3), 81-94. footnote36) Harding, J. S., & Boothroyd, I. (2004). Impacts of
mining. Freshwaters of New Zealand, 36(31-40), 30. footnote37) Sengupta, M.
(2021). Environmental impacts of mining: monitoring, restoration, and control.
CRC Press. footnote38) <a href="https://mining.ca/towards-sustainable-
mining/">https://mining.ca/towards-sustainable-mining/</a> footnote39) <a
href="https://www.ceecthefuture.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/01/20140212b-Development-Partner-
Framework.pdf">https://www.ceecthefuture.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/01/20140212b-Development-Partner-Framework.pdf</a>
footnote40) <a href="https://www.iisd.org/system/files/2021-10/still-one-earth-
sustainable-mining.pdf">https://www.iisd.org/system/files/2021-10/still-one-
earth-sustainable-mining.pdf</a> footnote41) <a href="https://www.icmm.com/en-
gb/mining-metals/contribution">https://www.icmm.com/en-gb/mining-
metals/contribution</a> footnote42) <a
href="https://www.securityhumanrightshub.org/resources/standard-for-responsible-
mining.html">https://www.securityhumanrightshub.org/resources/standard-for-
responsible-mining.html</a> footnote43) <a
href="https://www.responsibleminingfoundation.org/harmful-impacts-
mining/">https://www.responsibleminingfoundation.org/harmful-impacts-mining/</a>
footnote44) Business & Human Rights Resource Centre, 2021. Digging in the
shadows: Eastern Europe and Central Asia’s opaque extractives industry. 9 June
2021. <a href="https://www.business-humanrights.org/en/from-
us/briefings/digging-in-the-shadows-eastern-europe-and-central-asias-opaque-
extractives-industry">https://www.business-humanrights.org/en/from-
us/briefings/digging-in-the-shadows-eastern-europe-and-central-asias-opaque-
extractives-industry</a>. footnote45) IEA (2023), Critical Minerals Market
Review 2023, IEA, Paris <a href="https://www.iea.org/reports/critical-minerals-
market-review-2023">https://www.iea.org/reports/critical-minerals-market-
review-2023</a> footnote46) Aggregated data for Albemarle, Anglo American, BHP,
CMOC, Codelco, First Quantum Minerals, Freeport-McMoRan, Ganfeng Lithium,
Glencore, Mineral Resources, Norilsk Nickel, Rio Tinto, SQM, Teck Resources and
Tianqi Lithium. Considers reported data for all operations. Gender balance and
injury rate indicators show the weighted average by production. Source: IEA
analysis based on company reports. footnote47) <a
href="https://www.iea.org/news/critical-minerals-market-sees-unprecedented-
growth-as-clean-energy-demand-drives-strong-increase-in-
investment">https://www.iea.org/news/critical-minerals-market-sees-
unprecedented-growth-as-clean-energy-demand-drives-strong-increase-in-
investment</a> footnote48) <a href="https://www.batterymaterialsreview.com/produ
cts/">https://www.batterymaterialsreview.com/products/</a> footnote49) Gibon,
T., et al.(2017). Health benefits, ecological threats of low-carbon electricity.
Environmental Research Letters, 12(3): p. 034023. <a href="https://iopscience.io
p.org/article/10.1088/1748-
9326/aa6047">https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/aa6047</a>
footnote50) For a comprehensive understanding of the scope of impacts
considered, refer to Table 2. Further details can be found in the complete
assessment report accessible at <a href="https://unece.org/sites/default/files/2
022-
04/LCA_3_FINAL%20March%202022.pdf">https://unece.org/sites/default/files/2022-
04/LCA_3_FINAL%20March%202022.pdf</a>. footnote51) Ian Miller, Emre Gençer,
Hilary S. Vogelbaum, Patrick R. Brown, Sarah Torkamani, Francis M. O'Sullivan.
(2019). Parametric modeling of life cycle greenhouse gas emissions from
photovoltaic power, Applied Energy, 238, 760-774. <a href="https://doi.org/10.10
16/j.apenergy.2019.01.012">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.01.012</a>.
footnote52) Owusu, P. A., & Asumadu-Sarkodie, S. (2016). A review of renewable
energy sources, sustainability issues and climate change mitigation. Cogent
Engineering, 3(1), 1167990. footnote53) Sarkodie, S. A., & Strezov, V. (2018).
Empirical study of the environmental Kuznets curve and environmental
sustainability curve hypothesis for Australia, China, Ghana and USA. Journal of
cleaner production, 201, 98-110 footnote54) Miller, L. M., & Keith, D. W.
(2018). Observation-based solar and wind power capacity factors and power
densities. Environmental Research Letters, 13(10), 104008. footnote55)
footnote56) Leung, D. Y., & Yang, Y. (2012). Wind energy development and its
environmental impact: A review. Renewable and sustainable energy reviews, 16(1),
1031-1039. footnote57) Nazir, M. S., Mahdi, A. J., Bilal, M., Sohail, H. M.,
Ali, N., & Iqbal, H. M. N. (2019). Environmental impact and pollution-related
challenges of renewable wind energy paradigm – A review. Science of The Total
Environment. doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.05.274 footnote58) <a
href="https://climate.mit.edu/ask-mit/do-wind-turbines-kill-
birds">https://climate.mit.edu/ask-mit/do-wind-turbines-kill-birds</a>
footnote59) <a href="https://phys.org/news/2022-04-turbines-migrating-birds-
coexist.html">https://phys.org/news/2022-04-turbines-migrating-birds-
coexist.html</a> footnote60) <a href="https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-
021-82042-5">https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-021-82042-5</a> footnote61)
Tawalbeh, M., Al-Othman, A., Kafiah, F., Abdelsalam, E., Almomani, F., &
Alkasrawi, M. (2020). Environmental impacts of solar photovoltaic systems: A
critical review of recent progress and future outlook. Science of The Total
Environment, 143528. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.143528 footnote62) National
Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). 2012. <a
href="http://www.nrel.gov/analysis/re_futures/">Renewable Electricity Futures
Study</a>. Hand, M.M.; Baldwin, S.; DeMeo, E.; Reilly, J.M.; Mai, T.; Arent, D.;
Porro, G.; Meshek, M.; Sandor, D. eds. 4 vols. NREL/TP-6A20-52409. Golden, CO:
National Renewable Energy Laboratory. footnote63) Volume 2: Renewable
Electricity Generation and Storage Technologies. Augustine, C. et al. (2012).
Renewable Electricity Generation and Storage Technologies. Vol 2. of Renewable
Electricity Futures Study. NREL/TP-6A20-52409-2. Golden, CO: National Renewable
Energy Laboratory. <a href="https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy12osti/52409-
2.pdf">https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy12osti/52409-2.pdf</a> footnote64) National
Academy of Sciences. 2010. Electricity from Renewable Resources: Status,
Prospects, and Impediments. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. Online
at <a href="http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=12619">http://www.nap.edu/
openbook.php?record_id=12619</a> footnote65) Scheidel et al. Global impacts of
extractive and industrial development projects on Indigenous Peoples’ lifeways,
lands and rights, Science Advances, 9, (2023). footnote66) <a
href="https://www.amnesty.org/en/what-we-do/climate-change/energy-
transition/">https://www.amnesty.org/en/what-we-do/climate-change/energy-
transition/</a> footnote67) <a href="https://www.albemarle.com/news/albemarle-
becomes-first-lithium-producer-to-complete-independent-audit-and-publish-irma-re
port#:~:text=Albemarle%20shares%203.5%25%20of%20revenues,affect%20the%20upstream
%20groundwater%20levels">https://www.albemarle.com/news/albemarle-becomes-first-
lithium-producer-to-complete-independent-audit-and-publish-irma-report#:~:text=A
lbemarle%20shares%203.5%25%20of%20revenues,affect%20the%20upstream%20groundwater
%20levels</a>. footnote68) <a href="https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-
outlook-2023">https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2023</a>
footnote69) <a href="https://www.mrfcj.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/ECOSOC-
Partnership-Forum-Speech-FINAL.pdf">https://www.mrfcj.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/04/ECOSOC-Partnership-Forum-Speech-FINAL.pdf</a>
footnote70) Andrieu, J-B., Ucla, A. and Lee, M. Addressing Worker’s Rights in
the Engineering and Construction Sector – Opportunities and Collaboration. BSR
Working Paper. San Francisco. footnote71) <a
href="https://www.bsr.org/en/primers/10-human-rights-priorities-power-and-
utilities-sector">https://www.bsr.org/en/primers/10-human-rights-priorities-
power-and-utilities-sector</a> footnote72) <a href="https://lab.org.uk/the-
deadliest-place-for-environmental-defenders/">https://lab.org.uk/the-deadliest-
place-for-environmental-defenders/</a> footnote73) <a href="https://www.cepal.or
g/en/escazuagreement">https://www.cepal.org/en/escazuagreement</a> footnote74)
Traser, T. et al. Leapfrogging or lagging? Drivers of social equity from
renewable energy transitions globally. Energy Research and Social Science, 98
(2023). footnote75) Owen, J.R., Kemp, D., Lechner, A.M. et al. Energy transition
minerals and their intersection with land-connected peoples. Nat Sustain 6,
203–211 (2023). <a href="https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-022-00994-
6">https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-022-00994-6</a> footnote76) Fearnside, P. M.
(2006). Dams in the Amazon: Belo Monte and Brazil’s hydroelectric development of
the Xingu River Basin. Environmental management, 38, 16-27. DOI:
10.1007/s00267-005-0113-6 footnote77) Bermann, C. (2012). O projeto da Usina
Hidrelétrica Belo Monte: a autocracia energética como paradigma. Novos Cadernos
NAEA, 15(1), 5-23, ISSN 1516-6481 footnote78) Movimiento Ríos Vivos (November 22
de 2022): Website: “Lo que debes saber de HidroItuango.”
https://riosvivoscolombia.org/no-a-hidroituango/lo-que-debes-saber-sobre-
hidroituango/ footnote79) UNDP Report: “Extractive Industries for Sustainable
Development” <a href="https://info.undp.org/docs/pdc/Documents/H70/Extractives%2
0Global%20Initiative%20Final%20ProDoc%20Signed%202013%20FINAL.pdf">https://info.
undp.org/docs/pdc/Documents/H70/Extractives%20Global%20Initiative%20Final%20ProD
oc%20Signed%202013%20FINAL.pdf</a> footnote80) <a
href="https://www.iea.org/commentaries/the-importance-of-focusing-on-jobs-and-
fairness-in-clean-energy-transitions">https://www.iea.org/commentaries/the-
importance-of-focusing-on-jobs-and-fairness-in-clean-energy-transitions</a>
footnote81) <a href="https://www.iea.org/reports/net-zero-
by-2050">https://www.iea.org/reports/net-zero-by-2050</a> footnote82) <a href="h
ttps://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_emp/---
emp_ent/documents/publication/wcms_432859.pdf">https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups
/public/---ed_emp/---emp_ent/documents/publication/wcms_432859.pdf</a>
footnote83) <a href="https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-
employment-2023/executive-summary">https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-
employment-2023/executive-summary</a> footnote84) <a
href="https://www.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/2023-05/Gender-equality-in-
the-sustainable-energy-transition-
en.pdf">https://www.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/2023-05/Gender-equality-in-
the-sustainable-energy-transition-en.pdf</a> footnote85) <a href="https://www.ir
ena.org/-
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2022/Sep/IRENA_Solar_PV_Gender_perspective
_2022.pdf?rev=61477241eb9e4db2932757698c554dc2">https://www.irena.org/-
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2022/Sep/IRENA_Solar_PV_Gender_perspective
_2022.pdf?rev=61477241eb9e4db2932757698c554dc2</a> footnote86) IEA (2023),
Gender and Energy Data Explorer, IEA, Paris <a href="https://www.iea.org/data-
and-statistics/data-tools/gender-and-energy-data-
explorer">https://www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/data-tools/gender-and-energy-
data-explorer</a> footnote87) <a
href="https://www.barefootcollege.org/">https://www.barefootcollege.org/</a>
footnote88) <a href="https://www.unwomen.org/en/news/in-
focus/csw61/redistribute-unpaid-work">https://www.unwomen.org/en/news/in-
focus/csw61/redistribute-unpaid-work</a> footnote89) <a href="https://www.irena.
org/-
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2019/Jan/IRENA_Gender_perspective_2019.pdf
">https://www.irena.org/-
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2019/Jan/IRENA_Gender_perspective_2019.pdf
</a> footnote90) <a href="https://www.icrw.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/10/Invisible-market-energy-agricultural-technologies-
women%27s-economic-advancement.pdf">https://www.icrw.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/10/Invisible-market-energy-agricultural-technologies-
women%27s-economic-advancement.pdf</a> footnote91) <a
href="https://www.seforall.org/publications/esn/policy-
guide">https://www.seforall.org/publications/esn/policy-guide</a> footnote92)
https://www.seforall.org/system/files/2020-02/ESN_policymakers-SEforALL.pdf
footnote93) <a href="https://www.seforall.org/system/files/2020-02/ESN-
SEforALL.pdf">https://www.seforall.org/system/files/2020-02/ESN-SEforALL.pdf</a>
footnote94) (IEA, 2020) footnote95) (ILO, 2021). footnote96) (World Bank, 2019).
footnote97) (OECD, 2021). footnote98) (IMF, 2022). footnote99) Notably,
Wilkinson and Pickett (2009) footnote100) ILO. Combating Extreme Poverty by
Providing Active Support As Part of Conditional Cash Transfer Scheme. WHAT WORKS
Research Brief N15, (2019). footnote101)
https://www.energypolicy.columbia.edu/publications/energy-insecurity-in-the-
united-states/ footnote102)
https://www.nytimes.com/2024/01/11/us/politics/utility-bills-clean-energy.html
footnote103) https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-86884-0_27
footnote104) (IEA, 2020). footnote105) <a
href="https://www.iea.org/commentaries/empowering-people-the-role-of-local-
energy-communities-in-clean-energy-
transitions">https://www.iea.org/commentaries/empowering-people-the-role-of-
local-energy-communities-in-clean-energy-transitions</a> footnote106)
https://revolusolar.org.br/ footnote107)
https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/15/19/7439 footnote108) Grimley, M., Shastry, V.,
Kânoğlu-Özkan, D. G., Blevins, E., Beck, A. L., Chan, G., & Rai, V. (2022). The
grassroots are always greener: Community-based organizations as innovators of
shared solar energy in the United States. Energy Research & Social Science, 90,
102628.<a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2022.102628">
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2022.102628</a> footnote109) <a
href="https://energy.ec.europa.eu/topics/markets-and-consumers/energy-
communities_en">https://energy.ec.europa.eu/topics/markets-and-consumers/energy-
communities_en</a> footnote110) <a
href="https://www.iea.org/commentaries/empowering-people-the-role-of-local-
energy-communities-in-clean-energy-
transitions#reference-2">https://www.iea.org/commentaries/empowering-people-the-
role-of-local-energy-communities-in-clean-energy-transitions#reference-2</a>
footnote111) <a href="https://www.iea.org/programmes/people-centred-clean-
energy-transitions">https://www.iea.org/programmes/people-centred-clean-energy-
transitions</a> footnote112) <a href="https://www.iea.org/programmes/digital-
demand-driven-electricity-networks-
initiative">https://www.iea.org/programmes/digital-demand-driven-electricity-
networks-initiative</a> footnote113) <a
href="https://www.undp.org/publications/issue-brief-just-
transition">https://www.undp.org/publications/issue-brief-just-transition</a>
footnote114) <a href="https://leadthecharge.org/solutions/actions/free-prior-
and-informed-consent-fpic/">https://leadthecharge.org/solutions/actions/free-
prior-and-informed-consent-fpic/</a> footnote115) McGookin, C., Gallachóir, B. &
Byrne, E. (2021). Participatory methods in energy system modelling and planning
– A review, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 151, 111504. <a href="http
s://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2021.111504">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2021.1115
04</a> footnote116) van Veelen, Bregje; van der Horst, Dan (2018). What is
energy democracy? Connecting social science energy research and political
theory.. Energy Research & Social Science, 46(), 19–28.
doi:10.1016/j.erss.2018.06.010 footnote117) : Atteridge, A. S. et al (2022).
Exploring Just Transition in the Global South. Climate Strategies. footnote118)
<a href="https://www.caf.com/en/knowledge/views/2021/11/land-formalization-key-
to-agricultural-productivity-in-
colombia/">https://www.caf.com/en/knowledge/views/2021/11/land-formalization-
key-to-agricultural-productivity-in-colombia/</a> footnote119) <a
href="https://www.foei.org/publication/just-transition-renewable-energy-land-
use-report/">https://www.foei.org/publication/just-transition-renewable-energy-
land-use-report/</a> footnote120) Ackermann, M. et al. Potential socio-economic
consequences of mine closure. The Journal of Transdisciplinary Research in
Southern Africa, 14(1), (2018). footnote121) <a
href="https://www.undp.org/blog/reimagining-governance-just-energy-
transition">https://www.undp.org/blog/reimagining-governance-just-energy-
transition</a> footnote122) <a
href="https://www.lse.ac.uk/granthaminstitute/news/initiating-engagement-on-
just-transition-policy-a-
blueprint/">https://www.lse.ac.uk/granthaminstitute/news/initiating-engagement-
on-just-transition-policy-a-blueprint/</a> footnote123) <a
href="https://www.lse.ac.uk/granthaminstitute/publication/governance-pathways-
to-credible-implementation-of-net-zero-
targets/">https://www.lse.ac.uk/granthaminstitute/publication/governance-
pathways-to-credible-implementation-of-net-zero-targets/</a> footnote124) <a
href="https://unfccc.int/news/financing-fair-inclusive-and-just-transitions-to-
a-sustainable-future">https://unfccc.int/news/financing-fair-inclusive-and-just-
transitions-to-a-sustainable-future</a> footnote125) <a
href="https://www.undp.org/publications/issue-brief-just-
transition">https://www.undp.org/publications/issue-brief-just-transition</a>
footnote126) https://www.afdb.org/sites/default/files/2022/12/09/financing_a_jus
t_transition_in_africa-challenges_and_opportunities_final_1_2.pdf footnote127)
<a href="https://cdn.unrisd.org/assets/library/briefs/pdf-
files/2023/rpb-41-jetp.pdf">https://cdn.unrisd.org/assets/library/briefs/pdf-
files/2023/rpb-41-jetp.pdf</a> footnote128) <a
href="https://www.energymonitor.ai/just-transition/dont-write-off-the-jetp-just-
energy-transition-partnership-just-yet/?cf-
view">https://www.energymonitor.ai/just-transition/dont-write-off-the-jetp-just-
energy-transition-partnership-just-yet/?cf-view</a> footnote129) The table
provides an overview of the scope of impacts considered in the Lifecycle GHG
analysis, the results of which are presented in . For detailed information, the
complete assessment report is available for access at XXXXX. endnote1)